# 10.1 Introduction

The advantage of choosing an inertial reference frame to describe dynamic
processes was made evident in the discussions in Chapters 2 and 7. It is always possi-
ble to express the equations of motion for a system in an inertial frame. But there
are types of problems for which these equations would be extremely complex, and it
becomes easier to treat the motion of the system in a noninertial frame of reference.
To describe, for example, the motion of a particle on or near the surface of
Earth, it is tempting to do so by choosing a coordinate system fixed with respect
to Earth. We know, however, that Earth undergoes a complicated motion, com-
pounded of many different rotations (and hence accelerations) with respect to
an inertial reference frame identified with the “fixed” stars. Earth’s coordinate
system is, therefore, a noninertial frame of reference; and, although the solutions
to many problems can be obtained to the desired degree of accuracy by ignoring
this distinction, many important effects result from the noninertial nature of the
Earth coordinate system.
In fact, we have already studied noninertial systems when we studied ocean
tides (Section 5.5). Tidal forces due to Earth-Moon and Sun—Earth orbits are
observed on Earth’s surface, which is a noninertial system. Space does not allow
us further study in this chapter of this interesting subject, but quite reasonable
accounts can be found elsewhere.*
*See, for example, Knudsen and Hjorth (Kn00, Chapter 6) and M. S. Tiersten and H. Soodak, Am. J.
Phys. 68, 129 (2000).
387

<!-- page 02 -->

388 10 / MOTION IN A NONINERTIAL REFERENCE FRAME
$$
x_{3}
$$
xe
3 xg P
$$
\mathbf{R}
$$
r
iy XQ
$$
x_{i}^{\prime}
$$
X92
$$
x_{i}
$$
*)
*|
$$
\mathbf{R}
$$
FIGURE 10-1 The x; are coordinates in the fixed system, and x; are coordinates in
the rotating system. The vector R locates the origin of the rotating
$$
x_{i}^{\prime}
$$
system in the fixed system.
In analyzing the motion of rigid bodies in the following chapter, we also find
$$
\boldsymbol{x}_{i}
$$
it convenient to use noninertial reference frames and therefore make use of
$$
P ,
$$
much of the development presented here.
