> [!abstract] Vault Links
> **Concept Hub:** [[Chapter 10 - Non-Inertial Reference Frames]] | **Textbook Index:** [[Textbook Ch 10 - Non-Inertial Reference Frames]] | [[Brain-Map|🧠 Brain Map]]


# 10.2 Rotating Coordinate Systems

$$
\mathbf{r^{\prime}}=\mathbf{R}+\mathbf{r} \tag{10.1}
$$
Let us consider two sets of coordinate axes. Let one set be the “fixed” or inertial
axes, and let the other be an arbitrary set that may be in motion with respect to
$$
\mathbf{r}^{\prime}
$$
the inertial system. We designate these axes as the “fixed” and “rotating” axes, re-
spectively. We use x; as coordinates in the fixed system and x; as coordinates in
$$
\boldsymbol{P}
$$
the rotating system. If we choose some point P, as in Figure 10-1, we have
$$
\mathbf{r}
$$
r’=Rr (10.1)
where r’ is the radius vector of Pin the fixed system and r is the radius vector of
$$
{\bf R}
$$
Pin the rotating system. The vector R locates the origin of the rotating system in
the fixed system.
$$
\boldsymbol{P}
$$
We may always represent an arbitrary infinitesimal displacement by a pure
rotation about some axis called the instantaneous axis of rotation. For example,
$$
\mathbf{x}_{i}
$$
the instantaneous motion of a disk rolling down an inclined plane can be de-
$$
\boldsymbol{P}
$$
scribed as a rotation about the point of contact between the disk and the plane.
Therefore, if the x; system undergoes an infinitesimal rotation 60, correspon-
$$
x_{i}
$$
ding to some arbitrary infinitesimal displacement, the motion of P (which, for
the moment, we consider to be at rest in the x; system) can be described in terms
$$
\left( d \mathbf{r} \right)_{\mathrm{f i x e d}}=d \mathbf{\theta} \textbf{x r} \tag{10.2}
$$
of Equation 1.106 as
(dr) grea = dOX4¥ (10.2)
$$
\boldsymbol{x}_{i}^{\prime}
$$
where the designation “fixed” is explicitly included to indicate that the quantity
$$
d t ,
$$
dy is measured in the x;, or fixed, coordinate system. Dividing this equation by dz,
the time interval during which the infinitesimal rotation takes place, we obtain
$$
d \mathbf{r}
$$
the time of rate change of r as measured in the fixed coordinate system:
dr d®
$$
\mathbf{r}
$$
— =—xr (10.3)
$$
\left( \frac{d \mathbf{r}} {d t} \right)_{\mathrm{f i x e d}}=\frac{d \mathbf{\theta}} {d t} \textbf{x r} \tag{10.3}
$$
dt Jexea dt

<!-- page 03 -->

$$
\boldsymbol{\omega} \equiv\frac{d \boldsymbol{\theta}} {d t} \tag{10.4}
$$
or, because the angular velocity of the rotation is
$$
\left( {\frac{d \mathbf{r}} {d t}} \right)_{\mathrm{f i x e d}}={\boldsymbol{\omega}} {\textbf{x r}} \quad{\mathrm{~ ( f o r ~}} P {\mathrm{f i x e d ~ i n ~}} x_{i} {\mathrm{~ s y s t e m )}} \tag{10.5}
$$
d®
=— 10.4
$$
\left( d \mathbf{r} / d t \right)_{\mathrm{r o t a t i n g}}
$$
OF (10.4)
$$
\boldsymbol{P}
$$
We have
(#) =oxr_ (for Pfixed in x; system) (10.5)
$$
\mathbf{x}_{i}
$$
dr .
$$
\textbf{x r}
$$
dt fixed
This same result was determined in Section 1.15.
$$
\mathbf{r}
$$
If we allow the point P to have a velocity (dr/dt) -oraing With respect to the x;
$$
\left( {\cfrac{d \mathbf{r}} {d t}} \right)_{\mathrm{f i x e d}} \,=\left( {\cfrac{d \mathbf{r}} {d t}} \right)_{\mathrm{r o t a t i n g}} \,+\, {\boldsymbol{\omega}} \, \times\, \mathbf{r} \tag{10.6}
$$
system, this velocity must be added to X r to obtain the time rate of change of
rin the fixed system:
$$
\mathbf{r} \,=\, \boldsymbol{x}_{1} \mathbf{e}_{1} \,+\, \boldsymbol{x}_{2} \mathbf{e}_{2} \,+\, \boldsymbol{x}_{3} \mathbf{e}_{3}
$$
(“) = (=) +o@xr (10.6)
$$
\mathbf{\dot{r}}^{\prime}
$$
d d.
dt fixed dt rotating
$$
\begin{aligned} {\left( \frac{d \mathbf{r}} {d t} \right)_{\mathrm{f i x e d}}} & {{}=\frac{d} {d t} \left( \sum_{i} \mathbf{x}_{i} \textbf{e}_{i} \right)} \\ {} & {{}=\sum_{i} ( \dot{x}_{i} \textbf{e}_{i} \,+\, \boldsymbol{x}_{i} \dot{\textbf{e}}_{i} )} \\ \end{aligned} \tag{10.7}
$$
Consider a vector r = xe, + xg@_ + xs in the rotating system. Let the fixed
$$
\mathbf{\dot{e}}_{i} ?
$$
and rotating systems have the same origin. Find fr’ in the fixed system by direct
differentiation if the angular velocity of the rotating system is o in the fixed
$$
\dot{\mathbf{r}}_{r}
$$
system.
$$
\dot{\textbf{r}}_{r}=\left( {\frac{d \textbf{r}} {d t}} \right)_{\mathrm{r o t a t i n g}}
$$
Solution, We begin by taking the time derivative directly
(=) fixed dt ( i )
$$
\left( {\frac{d {\bf r}} {d t}} \right)_{\mathrm{f i x e d}}={\bf\dot{r}}_{r}+\, {\sum_{i}} {\bf x}_{i} {\bf\dot{e}}_{i} \tag{10.8}
$$
d d
$$
\boldsymbol{\omega_{i}}
$$
a =—_ > Xie;
= dee; + x;€)) (10.7)
$$
\mathbf{e_{1}}
$$
The first term is simply f, in the rotating system, but what are the é;?
$$
\mathbf{-e_{3}}
$$
r,=|—
dt rotating
$$
\mathbf{e_{1}}
$$
dr . .
$$
\omega_{2}
$$
—) =#,4+ Dx,e, (10.8)
dt fixed i
$$
\omega_{\bf3}
$$
Look at Figure 10-2 and examine which components of w, tend to rotate ey.
$$
+ \mathbf{e_{2}}
$$
We see that w, tends to rotate e; toward the —e; direction and that ws; tends to
rotate e, toward the +e, direction. We therefore have
$$
\mathbf{e_{1}}
$$
de,
$$
\frac{d \mathbf{e}_{1}} {d t}=\, \omega_{3} \mathbf{e}_{2} \,-\, \omega_{2} \mathbf{e}_{3}
$$
- = Ws — Wes (10.9a)

<!-- page 04 -->

390 10 / MOTION IN A NONINERTIAL REFERENCE FRAME
x3
$$
\underbrace{\begin{matrix} x_{3}} & {} & {} \\ {\underbrace{\cdots}_{\omega_{3}}} & {} \\ {\epsilon_{1}} & {\epsilon_{3}} & {} \\ \end{matrix}}_{\begin{matrix} {\epsilon_{2}} & {\Huge\wedge} \\ {\epsilon_{2}} & {\Huge\Huge\wedge}_{\omega_{2}}} x_{2}
$$
W3
&3
$$
\omega_{i}
$$
ey) e Xo
M9
1
$$
\mathbf{e}_{i}
$$
*y
FIGURE 10-2 The angular velocity components @; rotate the system around the e, axis,
$$
+ \mathbf{e}_{2}
$$
so that, for example, ws tends to rotate e, toward the +e, direction.
Similarly, we have
deg
$$
\omega_{3}
$$
— = —wse, + wyes (10.9b)
dt
$$
\mathbf{e_{1}}
$$
des
ZT = Wee] — Weo (10.9c)
$$
\frac{d \mathbf{e}_{2}} {d t}=\,-\, \omega_{3} \mathbf{e}_{1} \,+\, \omega_{1} \mathbf{e}_{3}
$$
dt
In each case, the direction of the time derivative of the unit vector must be per-
pendicular to the unit vector in order not to change its magnitude.
$$
\cfrac{d \mathbf{e}_{3}} {d t}=\, \omega_{2} \mathbf{e}_{1} \,-\, \omega_{1} \mathbf{e}_{2}
$$
Equations 10.9a—c can be written
é,=@ Xe, (10.10)
$$
{\bf\dot{e}}_{i}={\bf\omega} \times{\bf e}_{i} \tag{10.10}
$$
and Equation 10.8 becomes
dr
—_ =fr,+ Yo X X;e;
$$
\begin{aligned} {\left( \frac{d \mathbf{r}} {d t} \right)_{\mathrm{f i x e d}}} & {{}=\mathbf{\dot{r}}_{r}+\sum_{i} \boldsymbol{\omega} \textbf{x}_{i} \mathbf{e}_{i}} \\ {} & {{}=\mathbf{\dot{r}}_{r}+\boldsymbol{\omega} \textbf{x} \textbf{r}} \\ \end{aligned} \tag{10.11}
$$
dt fixed i
=f,+@xr (10.11)
$$
\mathbf{r}
$$
which is the same result as Equation 10.6.
—_—— ee
$$
\mathbf{r}
$$
Although we choose the displacement vector r for the derivation of Equation
10.6, the validity of this expression is not limited to the vector r. In fact, for an ar-
bitrary vector Q, we have
$$
{\bf Q}
$$
(2) -(®) axe aos
d d
$$
\boxed{\left( \frac{d \mathbf{Q}} {d t} \right)_{\mathrm{f i x e d}}=\left( \frac{d \mathbf{Q}} {d t} \right)_{\mathrm{r o t a t i n g}}+\textbf{\omega} \times\mathbf{Q}} \tag{10.12}
$$
dt fixed di rotating
Equation 10.12 is an important result.
We note, for example, that the angular acceleration @ is the same in both
$$
\dot{\omega}
$$
the fixed and rotating systems:
(*2) = @ +@xXo=® (10.13)
$$
\Bigg( \frac{d \boldsymbol{\omega}} {d t} \Bigg)_{\mathrm{f i x e d}} \,=\Bigg( \frac{d \boldsymbol{\omega}} {d t} \Bigg)_{\mathrm{r o t a t i n g}} \, \,+\, \, \boldsymbol{\omega} \, \times\, \, \boldsymbol{\omega} \, \equiv\, \dot{\boldsymbol{\omega}} \tag{10.13}
$$
dw :
dt fixed dt rotating
$$
\mathbf{x}
$$
because @ X @ vanishes and @ designates the common value in the two systems.

<!-- page 05 -->
