# 10.3 CENTRIFUGAL AND CORIOLIS FORCES 391

Equation 10.12 may now be used to obtain the expressions for the velocity of
$$
\boldsymbol{P}
$$
the point Pas measured in the fixed coordinate system. From Equation 10.1, we
have
( _ ) + ) (10.14)
$$
\left( \cfrac{d \mathbf{r} \,^{\prime}} {d t} \right)_{\mathrm{f i x e d}} \,=\, \left( \cfrac{d \mathbf{R}} {d t} \right)_{\mathrm{f i x e d}} \,+\, \left( \cfrac{d \mathbf{r}} {d t} \right)_{\mathrm{f i x e d}} \tag{10.14}
$$
dr’ R d
dt fixed dt fixed dt fixed
so that
$$
\left( {\frac{d \mathbf{r}^{\prime}} {d t}} \right)_{\mathrm{f i x e d}} \,=\, \left( {\frac{d \mathbf{R}} {d t}} \right)_{\mathrm{f i x e d}} \,+\, \left( {\frac{d \mathbf{r}} {d t}} \right)_{\mathrm{r o t a t i n g}} \,+\, {\boldsymbol{\omega}} \times\mathbf{r} \tag{10.15}
$$
(=) = (2) + («) +oxr (10.15)
dr’ dR d
dt / fixed dt } fxea at } rotating
$$
\begin{aligned} {\mathbf{v}_{f}} & {{} \equiv\mathbf{\dot{r}}_{f}=\left( \frac{d \mathbf{r}^{\, \prime}} {d t} \right)_{\mathrm{f i x e d}}} \\ {\mathbf{V}} & {{} \equiv\mathbf{\dot{R}}_{f}=\left( \frac{d \mathbf{R}} {d t} \right)_{\mathrm{f i x e d}}} \\ {\mathbf{v}_{r}} & {{} \equiv\mathbf{\dot{r}}_{r}=\left( \frac{d \mathbf{r}} {d t} \right)_{\mathrm{r o t a t i n g}}} \\ \end{aligned}
$$
If we define
. _ far’
Mia = Lwa = (=) (10.16a)
$$
\boxed{\mathbf{v}_{f}=\mathbf{V}+\mathbf{v}_{r}+\mathbf{\omega} \times\mathbf{r}} \tag{10.17}
$$
: dR
V=R,= (*) (10.16b)
at } fxea
$$
\mathbf{v}_{f}
$$
d
v,=i,= (2) (10.16c)
dt rotating
$$
\mathbf{v}
$$
we may write
3 where
: v, = Velocity relative to the fixed axes
$$
\mathbf{v}_{r}
$$
V = Linear velocity of the moving origin
v, = Velocity relative to the rotating axes
i o = Angular velocity of the rotating axes
$$
\omega
$$
‘ w Xx r = Velocity due to the rotation of the moving axes
4 We have seen that Newton’s equation F = ma is valid only in an inertial frame of
$$
\mathbf{r}=
$$
3 reference. The expression for the force on a particle can therefore be obtained
4 from
q F dv,
$$
\mathbf{F} \,=\, m \, \mathbf{a}
$$
q = = m|— 10.18
ma, = m dt ) rea (10.18)
q where the differentiation must be carried out with respect to the fixed system.
$$
\mathbf{F} \ =\ m \mathbf{a}_{f}=\ m \bigg( \cfrac{d \mathbf{v}_{f}} {d t} \bigg)_{\mathrm{f i x e d}} \tag{10.18}
$$
1 Differentiating Equation 10.17, we have
1 (=) (*) n (“ teaxrtox(# 10.19
an =|— —_ @XxXr — .
$$
\left( {\frac{d \mathbf{v}_{f}} {d t}} \right)_{\mathrm{f i x e d}} \,=\, \left( {\frac{d {\mathbf{V}}} {d t}} \right)_{\mathrm{f i x e d}} \,+\, \left( {\frac{d \mathbf{v}_{r}} {d t}} \right)_{\mathrm{f i x e d}} \,+\, {\dot{\boldsymbol{\omega}}} \times{\mathbf{r}} \,+\, {\boldsymbol{\omega}} \, \times\, \left( {\frac{d \mathbf{r}} {d t}} \right)_{\mathrm{f i x e d}} \tag{10.19}
$$
4 dt fixed at fixed dt fixed ° dt fixed

<!-- page 06 -->

392 10 / MOTION IN A NONINERTIAL REFERENCE FRAME
We denote the first term by R f
$$
\ddot{\mathbf{R}}
$$
“ dV
R;= (2) (10.20)
dt /§xed
$$
\ddot{\mathbf{R}}_{f} \equiv\left( \cfrac{d \mathbf{V}} {d t} \right)_{\mathrm{f i x e d}} \tag{10.20}
$$
The second term can be evaluated by substituting v, for Q in Equation 10.12:
adv, dv,
—) =(— + @ Xv,
$$
{\bf Q}
$$
dt fixed dt rotating
=a,+@ Xv, (10.21)
$$
\mathbf{v}_{r}
$$
where a, is the acceleration in the rotating coordinate system. The last term in
Equation 10.19 can be obtained directly from Equation 10.6:
dr dr
$$
\begin{aligned} {\left( \frac{d \mathbf{v}_{r}} {d t} \right)_{\mathrm{f i x e d}}} & {{}=\left( \frac{d \mathbf{v}_{r}} {d t} \right)_{\mathrm{r o t a t i n g}}+\boldsymbol{\omega} \textbf{x} \mathbf{v}_{r}} \\ {} & {{}=\textbf{a}_{r}+\boldsymbol{\omega} \textbf{x} \textbf{v}_{r}} \\ \end{aligned} \tag{10.21}
$$
@ X |— =ox|— + @ X (@ Xr)
dt fixed dt rotating
=O Xv,+o X (w Xr) (10.22)
$$
\mathbf{a}_{r}
$$
Combining Equations 10.18-10.22, we obtain
F = ma,= mR,+ ma, + m@ Xr + mw xX (@ Xr) + 2mw xv, (10.23)
To an observer in the rotating coordinate system, however, the effective
$$
\begin{aligned} {\boldsymbol{\omega} \times\left( \frac{d \mathbf{r}} {d t} \right)_{\mathrm{f i x e d}}} & {{}=\boldsymbol{\omega} \times\left( \frac{d \mathbf{r}} {d t} \right)_{\mathrm{r o t a t i n g}}+\boldsymbol{\omega} \times( \boldsymbol{\omega} \times\mathbf{r} )} \\ {} & {{}=\boldsymbol{\omega} \times\mathbf{v}_{_{\mathrm{r}}}+\boldsymbol{\omega} \times( \boldsymbol{\omega} \times\mathbf{r} )} \\ \end{aligned} \tag{10.22}
$$
force on a particle is given by*
F og = ma, (10.24)
$$
{\bf F}=\ m {\bf a}_{f}=\ m {\bf\ddot{R}}_{f}+\ m {\bf a}_{r}+\ m {\dot{\bf\omega}} \ \times{\bf r}+\ m {\bf\omega} \times( {\bf\omega} \times{\bf r} ) \ +\ 2 m {\bf\omega} \ \times{\bf v} ,
$$
=F — mR;— me x r— mw x (@ Xr) — 2mw x Vv, (10.25)
The first term, F, is the sum of the forces acting on the particle as measured in
the fixed inertial system. The second (—mR,) and third (— mo x r) terms result
$$
\begin{array} {r c l} {{\bf F_{\mathrm{e f f}}} \! \! \! \! \! \!} & {{}=\, m {\bf a} ,} \\ {} & {{}} \\ {} & {{}={\bf F} \,-\, m {\bf\ddot{R}}_{f}-\, m \dot{\bf\omega} \, \times\, {\bf r} \,-\, m {\bf\omega} \, \times\, ( {\bf\omega} \, \times\, {\bf r} ) \,-\, 2 \, m {\bf\omega} \, \times\, {\bf v}_{r}}} \\ \end{array} \tag{10.25}
$$
because of the translational and angular acceleration, respectively, of the mov-
ing coordinate system relative to the fixed system.
The quantity —mw X (@ Xr) is the usual centrifugal force term and reduces
$$
\mathbf{F}
$$
to mw*r for the case in which w is normal to the radius vector. Note that the
minus sign implies that the centrifugal force is directed outward from the center
of rotation (Figure 10-3).
$$
(-\boldsymbol{m} \mathbf{\ddot{R}}_{f} )
$$
The last term in Equation 10.25 is a totally new quantity that arises from the
motion of the particle in the rotating coordinate system. This term is called the
$$
(-\, m \mathbf{\dot{\omega}} \, \textbf{x} \, \mathbf{r} )
$$
Coriolis force. Note that the Coriolis force does indeed arise from the motion of
the particle, because the force is proportional to v, and hence vanishes if there
is no motion.
$$
- \, m \mathbf{\omega} \textbf{x} ( \mathbf{\omega} \, \textbf{x} \textbf{r} )
$$
Because we have used (on several occasions) the term centrifugal force and
have now introduced the Coriolis force, we must now inquire about the physical
meaning of these quantities. It is important to realize that the centrifugal and
$$
m \omega^{2} r
$$
Coriolis forces are not forces in the usual sense of the word; they have been
*This result was published by G. G. Coriolis in 1835. The theory of the composition of accelerations
$$
\boldsymbol{\upsilon}_{r}
$$
was an outgrowth of Coriolis’s study of water wheels.

<!-- page 07 -->

| 10.3 CENTRIFUGAL AND CORIOLIS FORCES 393
: -w x @xr)
r
$$
\mathbf{x}
$$
wo
FIGURE 10-3 Diagram indicating that the vector —w x (w x r) points outward,
away from the axis of rotation along w. The term —mo X (@ X r)
$$
- \omega\times
$$
is the usual centrifugal force.
introduced in an artificial manner as a result of our arbitrary requirement that
we be able to write an equation resembling Newton’s equation that is at the same
$$
\mathbf{x}
$$
time valid in a noninertial reference frame; that is, the equation
F=ma f
is valid only in an inertial frame. If, in a rotating reference frame, we wish to
$$
\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\mathbf{-} \, m \mathbf{\omega} \, \times\, ( \mathbf{\omega} \, \times\, \mathbf{r} )
$$
write (let R, and @ be zero for simplicity)
F .¢ = ma,
. then we can express such an equation in terms of the real force ma 7 as
$$
\mathbf{F} \,=\, m \mathbf{a}_{f}
$$
F .¢ = ma, + (noninertial terms)
where the “noninertial terms” are identified as the centrifugal and Coriolis
“forces.” Thus, for example, if a body rotates about a fixed force center, the only
$$
\ddot{\mathbf{R}}_{f}
$$
real force on the body is the force of attraction toward the force center (and
gives rise to the centripetal acceleration). An observer moving with the rotating
body, however, measures this central force and also notes that the body does not
$$
\dot{\omega}
$$
fall toward the force center. To reconcile this result with the requirement that
the net force on the body vanish, the observer must postulate an additional
force—the centrifugal force. But the “requirement” is artificial; it arises solely
$$
\mathbf{F}_{\mathrm{\scriptsize{e f f}}}=\boldsymbol{m} \mathbf{a}_{\boldsymbol{r}}
$$
from an attempt to extend the form of Newton’s equation to a noninertial sys-
tem, and this can be done only by introducing a fictitious “correction force.”
The same comments apply for the Coriolis force; this “force” arises when an at-
$$
m \mathbf{a}_{f}
$$
tempt is made to describe motion relative to the rotating body.
Despite their artificiality, the concepts of centrifugal and Coriolis forces are
useful. To describe the motion of a particle relative to a body rotating with re-
$$
\mathbf{F}_{\mathrm{e f f}}=\, m \mathbf{a}_{f} \,+\, ( \mathrm{n o n i n e r t i a l ~ t e r m s} )
$$
spect to an inertial reference frame is a complicated matter. But the problem
can be made relatively easy by the simple expedient of introducing the “nonin-
ertial forces,” which then allows the use of an equation of motion resembling
$$
\mathbf{a}
$$
Newton’s equation.

<!-- page 08 -->

394 10 / MOTION IN A NONINERTIAL REFERENCE FRAME
A student is performing measurements with a hockey puck on a large merry-
$$
\mathbf{F}_{\mathrm{e f f}}
$$
go-round with a smooth (frictionless) horizontal, flat surface. The merry-go-
round has a constant angular velocity and rotates counterclockwise as seen
from above. (a) Find the effective force on the hockey puck after it is given a
$$
\mathbf{F}_{\mathrm{e f f}}={\mathrm{\it~-m \omega}} \times\mathbf{( \omega\times r ) ~}-{\mathrm{\it~ 2 m \omega}} \times\mathbf{v}_{r} \tag{10.26}
$$
push. (b) Plot the path for various initial directions and velocities of the puck as
observed by the person on the merry-go-round that pushes the puck.
$$
\mathbf{v}_{r}
$$
Solution. The first three terms for F .¢ in Equation 10.25 are zero, so the effec-
tive force as observed by the person on the merry-go-round is
F.g = —mo X (W Xr) — 2mw X v, (10.26)
$$
\mathbf{a}_{\mathrm{e f f}}={\frac{\mathbf{F}_{\mathrm{e f f}}} {m}}=\,-\, {\boldsymbol{\omega}} \, \times\, ( {\boldsymbol{\omega}} \, \times\, \mathbf{r} ) \,-\, 2 \, {\boldsymbol{\omega}} \, \times\, \mathbf{v}_{r} \tag{10.27}
$$
We have taken the frictional force to be zero. Remember that v, is the velocity
as measured by the observer on the rotating surface. The effective accelera-
$$
\mathbf{v}_{\mathrm{e f f}}=\ \int\! \! \mathbf{a}_{\mathrm{\, e f f}} \, d t
$$
tion is
Fete
deg = T= —@ X (@ Xr) — 2M Xv, (10.27)
$$
\mathbf{r}_{\mathrm{e f f}}=\ \int\! \! \mathbf{v}_{\mathrm{e f f}} \, d t
$$
The velocity and position are given by integration, in turn, of the acceleration.
Vert = facoat (10.28a)
leg = fred ' (10.28b)
$$
\omega R
$$
We put the origin of our rotating coordinate system at the center of the
merry-go-round. We will need the initial positions and velocities of the puck to
$$
\boldsymbol{R}
$$
plot the motion. For this example, we let the radius of the merry-go-round be
Rand the velocities be in units of wR. The initial position of the puck will always
be at an (x, y) position of (—0.5R, 0).
$$
(-0 . 5 R , \, 0 )
$$
We perform a numerical calculation to determine the motion and show
the results for several directions and values of the initial velocity in Figure 10-4.
$$
( x , \, y )
$$
For purposes of calculation, we let @ = 1 rad/s and R = 1 m, so the units of vg
(initial speed) and T (time for puck to slide off the surface) shown in Figure
10-4 are in m/s and s, respectively. For parts (a)—(d), the initial velocity is in
$$
R=1 \textrm{m}
$$
the + y-direction, and the initial speed decreases in each succeeding view. In
(a), the puck slides off quickly. For (b) and (d), the puck slides off at similar
positions, but note the differences in initial speeds as well as the time it takes
$$
\omega=1
$$
the puck to reach the edge. For a speed intermediate between these two
speeds, as seen in (c), the puck may make several paths around the merry-go-
$$
\boldsymbol{\upsilon}_{0}
$$
round; at some speed, the puck must stay on. The last two views show the ini-
tial velocity at an angle of 45° to the xaxis. In (e), the puck loops around its
path along the way to exiting the merry-go-round, and in (f), it changes direc-
$$
\mathit{T}
$$
tion rather abruptly.
The real challenge is to perform such experiments to compare the actual
$$
+ y
$$
paths in the fixed and rotating coordinate systems with the computer calculations.

<!-- page 09 -->
