# 10.4 MOTION RELATIVE TO THE EARTH 395

$$
\upsilon_{\mathrm{o}}=1 . 5
$$
Uo=1.5 = 0.8 U, = 0.45
+ + +
$$
\upsilon_{\mathrm{o}}=0 . 8
$$
T= 0.86 T=2.9 T=17.3
y
$$
\not\! \! N v_{0}=0 . 3 2 8
$$
(a) {b) {c)
x
$$
{\underline{{\boldsymbol{\upsilon}}}}_{\mathrm{o}}=0 . {\boldsymbol{4 7}}
$$
9 = 0.328 U, = 0.47 Vo = 0.283
$$
\boldsymbol{T}=\boldsymbol{5} . \boldsymbol{0}
$$
+ w+ +
T= 5.0 T= 3.83 T= 3.3
$$
T={\bf3 . 3}
$$
(d) {e) (f)
FIGURE 104 The motion of the hockey puck of Example 10.2 as observed in the
$$
\boldsymbol{\upsilon}_{0}
$$
rotating system for various initial directions and velocities vp at the
times Tnoted. The angular velocity w(1 rad/s) is out of the page.
$$
\omega( \mathbf{l} \ \mathrm{r a d / s} )
$$
In each of the cases above, the puck will move in a straight line in the fixed sys-
tem, because there is no friction or external force in the plane.
$$
T_{\mathrm{}}
$$
a
$$
x^{\prime} y^{\prime} z^{\prime}
$$
The motion of Earth with respect to an inertial reference frame is dominated by
$$
\mathbf{F}=\mathbf{S} ~+~ m \mathbf{g}_{0}
$$
Earth’s rotation about its own axis. The effects of the other motions (e.g., the
revolution about the Sun and the motion of the solar system with respect to the
$$
\mathbf{s}
$$
local galaxy) are small by comparison. If we place the fixed inertial frame x’y’z’
at the center of Earth and the moving reference frame xyz on the surface of
$$
m \mathbf{g}_{0}
$$
Earth, we can describe the motion of a moving object close to the surface of
Earth as shown in Figure 10-5. We then apply Equation 10.25 to the dynamical
$$
\mathbf{g}_{0}
$$
motion. We denote the forces as measured in the fixed inertial system as
$$
{\bf g}_{0} \,=\,-\, G \, \frac{\, M_{E}} {R^{2}} \, {\bf e}_{R} \tag{10.29}
$$
F = S + mgp, where S represents the sum of the external forces (e.g., impulse,
electromagnetic, friction) other than gravitation, and mgy represents the gravi-
$$
M_{E}
$$
tational attraction to Earth. In this case, gy represents Earth’s gravitational field
vector (Equation 5.3),
$$
R
$$
Mr
Zo = ~ Oe er (10.29)
$$
\textbf{e}_{R}
$$
where M,, is the mass of Earth, Ris the radius of Earth, and the unit vector e x is
$$
\mathbf{R}
$$
a unit vector along the direction of R in Figure 10-5. We are assuming Earth is

<!-- page 10 -->

396 10 / MOTION IN A NONINERTIAL REFERENCE FRAME
$$
y
$$
z’
fete Nets
$$
\boldsymbol{x^{\prime}} \boldsymbol{y^{\prime}} \boldsymbol{z^{\prime}}
$$
fics gy,
| vi
$$
\mathbf{R}
$$
[fal fei
oe Peel
$$
\mathbf{F}_{\mathrm{e f f}}
$$
ee
i “iff OA ea
$$
\mathbf{F}_{\mathrm{e f f}}=\mathbf{S} \,+\, m \mathbf{g}_{0} \,-\, m \ddot{\mathbf{R}}_{f}-\, m \, \dot{\boldsymbol{\omega}} \, \times\, \mathbf{r} \,-\, m \, \boldsymbol{\omega} \, \times\, ( \boldsymbol{\omega} \, \times\, \mathbf{r} ) \,-\, 2 \, m \, \boldsymbol{\omega} \, \times\, \mathbf{v} , \tag{10.30}
$$
x’
FIGURE 10-5 In order to study the motion of an object near Earth’s surface, we
$$
( \mathbf{e^{\prime}} )
$$
place a fixed inertial frame x'y'z’ at the center of Earth and the
moving frame xyz on Earth’s surface.
$$
\boldsymbol{z}^{\prime}
$$
spherical and isotropic and that R originates from the center of Earth. The ac-
celeration of gravity varies over the surface of Earth due to Earth’s oblateness,
$$
7 . 3 \times1 0^{-5}
$$
density nonuniformities, and altitude. We choose, at the present time, not to
add this complexity to motion relative to Earth, but we have previously pointed
$$
\boldsymbol{\omega}
$$
out that effects such as these can be considered in due course by performing
computer calculations.
$$
\textbf{x r}
$$
The effective force F 4 as measured in the moving system placed on the sur-
face of Earth becomes, from Equation 10.25,
$$
\ddot{\mathbf{R}}_{f}=\mathbf{\omega} \times\dot{\mathbf{R}}_{f}
$$
F.g = S + mgy — mR;— m@ Xr — mw X (WM Xr) — 2ma Xv, (10.30)
We let Earth’s angular velocity w be along the inertial system’s z’-direction (e}).
$$
\ddot{\mathbf{R}}_{f}=\mathbf{\omega} \times\mathbf{\omega} \times\mathbf{R} ) \tag{10.31}
$$
The value of w is 7.3 X 10~° rad/s, which is a relatively slow rotation, but it is
365 times greater than the rotation frequency of Earth about the Sun. The value
$$
\mathbf{F}_{\mathrm{e f f}}=\mathbf{S} \,+\, m \mathbf{g}_{0} \,-\, m \, \mathbf{\omega} \, \times\, \left[ \, \mathbf{\omega} \, \times\, \left( \mathbf{r} \,+\, \mathbf{R} \right) \, \right] \,-\, 2 \, m \, \mathbf{\omega} \, \times\, \mathbf{v}_{r} \tag{10.32}
$$
of w is practically constant in time, and the term @ x r will be neglected.
According to Equation 10.12, we have for the third term above,
$$
\boldsymbol{m )}
$$
R;= @ X (w Xx R) (10.31)
Equation 10.30 now becomes
$$
\mathbf{g}
$$
F.g = S + mg) — mw x [w X (r + R)] — 2mm x v, (10.32)
The second and third terms (divided by m) are what we experience (and meas-
$$
\mathbf{s}
$$
ure) on the surface of Earth as the effective g, and we will henceforth denote it
as g. Its value is
$$
\mathbf{g} \,=\, \mathbf{g}_{0} \,-\, \mathbf{\omega} \, \times\, \left[ \, \mathbf{\omega} \, \times\, \left( \mathbf{r} \,+\, \mathbf{R} \right) \, \right] \tag{10.33}
$$
g=g.-—@ x [w xX (r+ R)] (10.33)

<!-- page 11 -->

$$
\textbf{x} ( \boldsymbol{\omega} \textbf{x} \textbf{R} )
$$
The second term of Equation 10.33 is the centrifugal force. Because we are lim-
$$
r \ll R
$$
iting our present consideration to motion near the surface of Earth, we have
r< R, and the w xX (@ xX R) term totally dominates the centrifugal force. For
$$
\textbf{x} ( \boldsymbol{\omega} \textbf{x} \mathbf{r} )
$$
situations far away from the surface of Earth, we would have to consider both
$$
\boldsymbol{g}
$$
the variation of g with altitude as well as the @ x (@ X r) term. The centrifugal
$$
0 . 0 5 2 \, \ \mathrm{m / s^{2}}
$$
force is responsible for the oblateness of Earth. Earth is not really a solid sphe-
roid; it is more like a strongly viscous liquid with a solid crust. Because of
$$
\mathbf{g}
$$
Earth’s rotation, Earth has deformed so that its equatorial radius is 21.4 km
$$
\mathbf{g_{0}}
$$
greater than its polar radius, and the acceleration of gravity is 0.052 m/s?
$$
\mathbf{g}
$$
greater at the poles than at the equator. The surface of calm ocean water is per-
pendicular to g, not gp and on the average, the plane of Earth’s surface is also
$$
\boxed{\mathbf{\hat{F}}_{\mathrm{e f f}}=\mathbf{S} \,+\, m \mathbf{g} \,-\, 2 \, m \, \mathbf{\omega} \, \times\, \mathbf{v}_{r}} \tag{10.34}
$$
perpendicular to g.
$$
\mathbf{s}
$$
We rewrite Equation 10.32 in simpler terms as
$$
\mathbf{s}
$$
It is this equation that we will use to discuss the motion of objects close to the
surface of Earth.
$$
\omega^{2} R
$$
But first, let’s return to the effective g of Equation 10.33. The period of a
$$
\mathbf{g}
$$
pendulum determines the magnitude of g, and the direction of a plumb bob in
equilibrium determines the direction of g. The value of w?R is 0.034 m/s?, and
$$
\mathbf{g}
$$
this is a significant enough amount (0.35%) of the magnitude of g to be consid-
$$
\textbf{x} ( \mathbf{r}+\mathbf{R} ) ]
$$
ered. We determined the direction of the centrifugal term w x [@ x (r + R)]
$$
\mathbf{x}
$$
in Figure 10-3 (where the r is our r’ of Figure 10-5). The direction of the cen-
trifugal term (—w x [w x (r + R)] is outward from the axis of the rotating
$$
\mathbf{r}^{\prime}
$$
Earth. The direction of a plumb bob will include the centrifugal term. Because
$$
\mathbf{r}
$$
of this fact, the direction of g at a given point is in general slightly different from
$$
(-\mathbf{\omega} \, \times\, [ \, \mathbf{\omega} \, \times\, ( \mathbf{r} \,+\, \mathbf{R} ) \, ]
$$
the true vertical (defined as the direction of the line connecting the point with
the center of Earth; see Problem 10-12). The situation is represented schemati-
$$
\mathbf{g}
$$
cally (with considerable exaggeration) in Figure 10-6.
$$
\sum_{\left( \begin{matrix} \\ \end{matrix} \begin{matrix} 1 {\sqrt{n}} \\ \end{matrix} \right)} \\ \end{matrix} \overbrace{\left( \begin{matrix} \end{matrix} \right)}^{-\infty\times\left( \begin{matrix} \end{matrix} \right)}
$$
wo { —@ x (x R)
$$
\mathbf{g_{0}}
$$
|
FIGURE 10-6 Near Earth’s surface the terms gy (Earth’s gravitational field vector)
$$
- \mathbf{\omega} \times\mathbf{( \omega\times R )}
$$
: and —@ Xx (w x R) (main centrifugal term) make up the effective g
$$
\mathbf{g}
$$
‘ (other smaller terms have been neglected). The effect of the centrifu-
$$
\mathbf{s}
$$
: gal term on g is exaggerated here.

<!-- page 12 -->

398 10 / MOTION IN A NONINERTIAL REFERENCE FRAME
We,
Vv,
TOE Se Deflected path
FIGURE 10-7 In the Northern Hemisphere, a particle projected in a horizontal plane
$$
\omega
$$
will be directed toward the right of the particle’s motion, In the
Southern Hemisphere, the direction will be to the left.
Coriolis Force Effects
The angular velocity vector w, which represents Earth’s rotation about its axis, is
directed in a northerly direction. Therefore, in the Northern Hemisphere, w
$$
\omega
$$
has a component w, directed outward along the local vertical. If a particle is pro-
jected in a horizontal plane (in the local coordinate system at the surface of
Earth) with a velocity v,, then the Coriolis force —-2mw x v, has a component in
the plane of magnitude 2mw,v, directed toward the right of the particle’s motion
(see Figure 10-7), and a deflection from the original direction of motion results.*
$$
- 2 \, m \boldsymbol{\omega} \textbf{x} \textbf{v} ,
$$
Because the magnitude of the horizontal component of the Coriolis force is
proportional to the vertical component of w, the portion of the Coriolis force
producing deflections depends on the latitude, being a maximum at the North
Pole and zero at the equator. In the Southern Hemisphere, the component a, is
directed inward along the local vertical, and hence all deflections are in the op-
posite sense from those in the Northern Hemisphere.*
$$
\mathbf{v}_{r} ,
$$
Perhaps the most noticeable effect of the Coriolis force is that on the air
masses. As air flows from high-pressure regions to low pressure, the Coriolis
force deflects the air toward the right in the Northern Hemisphere, producing
cyclonic motion (Figure 10-8). The air rotates with high pressure on the right
and low pressure on the left. The high pressure prevents the Coriolis force from
$$
2 m \omega_{z} \upsilon_{r}
$$
deflecting the air masses farther to the right, resulting in a counterclockwise
flow of air. In the temperate regions, the airflow does not tend to be along the
pressure gradients, but rather along the pressure isobars due to the Coriolis
force and the associated centrifugal force of the rotation.
*Poisson discussed the deviation of projectile motion in 1837.
$$
\omega
$$
+During the naval engagement near the Falkland Islands early in World War I, the British gunners
were surprised to see their accurately aimed salvos falling 100 yards to the left of the German ships.
The designers of the sighting mechanisms were well aware of the Coriolis deflection and had care-
fully taken this into account, but they apparently were under the impression that all sea battles took
place near 50°N latitude and never near 50°S latitude. The British shots, therefore, fell at a distance
$$
\boldsymbol{\omega}_{z}
$$
from the targets equal to twice the Coriolis deflection.

<!-- page 13 -->

N
High ]
$$
E
$$
_—
eee
W———~ | Low } E
NY (
$$
\bf a
$$
Ss
FIGURE 10-8 The Coriolis force deflects air in the Northern Hemisphere to the right
producing cyclonic motion.
Near the equatorial regions, the sun heating Earth’s surface causes hot sur-
$$
{\bf v} .
$$
face air to rise. In the Northern Hemisphere, this results in cooler air moving in
a southerly direction toward the equator. The Coriolis force deflects this moving
air to the right, resulting in the trade winds, which provide a breeze toward the
southwest in the Northern Hemisphere and toward the northwest in the Southern
$$
h
$$
Hemisphere. Note that this particular effect does not occur at the equator because
of the directions of w and the air’s surface v.
The actual motion of air masses is much more complicated than the simple
picture described here, but the qualitative features of cyclonic motion and the
$$
{\bf S}=0 .
$$
trade winds are correctly given by considering the effects of the Coriolis force. The
motion of water in whirlpools is (at least in principle) a similar situation, but in ac-
tuality, other factors (various perturbations and residual angular momentum)
dominate the Coriolis force, and whirlpools are found with both directions of flow.
$$
\mathbf{F}_{\mathrm{e f f}}=\mathit{m a}_{r}
$$
Even under laboratory conditions, it is extremely difficult to isolate the Coriolis ef
fect. (Reports of water in flush toilets and bathtubs circulating in opposite direc-
tions as cruise ships cross the equator are most likely highly exaggerated.)
Find the horizontal deflection from the plumb line caused by the Coriolis force
$$
\mathbf{a}_{r}=\mathbf{g}-2 \boldsymbol{\omega} \, \mathbf{x} \, \mathbf{v}_{r}
$$
acting on a particle falling freely in Earth’s gravitational field from a height h
above Earth’s surface.
Solution. We use Equation 10.34 with the applied forces S = 0. If we set
F.g¢ = ma,, we can solve for the acceleration of the particle in the rotating coor-
$$
\mathbf{g}
$$
dinate system fixed on Earth.
a,=g- 20 Xv,
The acceleration due to gravity g is the effective one and is along the plumb line.
$$
- \mathbf{g} )
$$
We choose a zaxis directed vertically outward (along —g) from the surface of

<!-- page 14 -->

400 10 / MOTION IN A NONINERTIAL REFERENCE FRAME
@
$$
\mathbf{e}_{x}
$$
Lats
E
$$
\mathbf{e}_{y}
$$
ee 7 ~
8 e,
$$
\mathbf{e}_{z}
$$
a Pen , ii
ae :
“et 7
$$
\mathbf{e}_{y}
$$
— = f
s
$$
\mathbf{e}_{x}
$$
FIGURE 10-9 The coordinate system on Earth’s surface for finding the horizontal
deflection of a falling particle from the plumb line caused by the
$$
g
$$
Coriolis force. The vector e, is in the southerly direction, and e, is in
the easterly direction.
Earth. With this definition of e,, we complete the construction of a right-hand co-
$$
\mathit{O}
$$
ordinate system by specifying that e, be in a southerly and e, in an easterly direc-
tion, as in Figure 10-9. We make the approximation that the distance of fall is
$$
{{\begin{aligned} {\omega_{x}} & {{}={} \,-\omega\, \operatorname{c o s} \lambda} \\ {\omega_{y}} & {{}=\, 0} \\ {\omega_{z}} & {{}=\, \omega\, \operatorname{s i n} \lambda} \\ \end{aligned}}}
$$
sufficiently small that g remains constant during the process.
Because we have chosen the origin O of the rotating coordinate system to
$$
\mathbf{e}_{y}
$$
lie in the Northern Hemisphere, we have
@, = —w cosa
wo, = 0
$$
\dot{z} ,
$$
o,=asinaA
Although the Coriolis force produces small velocity components in the e,
$$
\dot{y}
$$
and e, directions, we can certainly neglect x and j compared with 2, the vertical
velocity. Then, approximately,
$$
\mathbf{e}_{x}
$$
x =0
5 =0
z= -gt
$$
\begin{array} {l} {{\dot{x}} \; \equiv\; 0} \\ {{\dot{y}} \; \cong\; 0} \\ {{\dot{z}} \; \equiv\;-g t} \\ \end{array}
$$
where we obtain z by considering a fall from rest. Therefore, we have
e, e, e,
$$
\dot{z}
$$
oO Xv, = |-wcosrA O wsindA
0 0 —gt
$$
\omega\textbf{x v}_{r} \; \cong\; \left| \begin{matrix} {\textbf{e}_{x}} & {\textbf{e}_{y}} & {\textbf{e}_{z}} \\ {-\omega\, \operatorname{c o s} \, \lambda} & {0} & {\omega\, \operatorname{s i n} \, \lambda} \\ {0} & {0} & {-g t} \\ \end{matrix} \right|
$$
= —(wgt cos Aje,

<!-- page 15 -->

$$
{\bf g}
$$
The components of g are
gx = 0
$$
{\begin{aligned} {} & {{} g_{x}=0} \\ {} & {{} g_{y}=0} \\ {} & {{} g_{z}=-g} \\ \end{aligned}}
$$
8 = 9
& =~ ~8
$$
\omega^{2}
$$
so the equations for the components of a, (neglecting terms* in w?; see
Problem 10-13) become
$$
\mathbf{a}_{r}
$$
(a,).= ¥ = 0
(a,), = ¥ = 2wgt cosa
$$
\begin{array} {l} {{( {\bf a}_{r} )_{x}={\bf\ddot{x}} \; \equiv\; 0}} \\ {{( {\bf a}_{r} )_{y}={\bf\ddot{y}} \; \cong\; 2 \omega g t \, \cos\lambda}} \\ {{( {\bf a}_{r} )_{z}={\bf\ddot{z}} \; \cong\;-g}} \end{array}
$$
(a),= 2 = —g
$$
\mathbf{e}_{y}
$$
Thus, the effect of the Coriolis force is to produce an acceleration in the e Bs
: or easterly, direction. Integrating jj twice, we have
$$
\ddot{y}
$$
yy) = 3 v8 cos A
| 1 ss
$$
y ( t ) \, \, \cong\, \, \frac{1} {3} \, \omega g t^{\, 3} \, \operatorname{c o s} \, \lambda
$$
where y = 0 and j = 0 at t= 0. The integration of z yields the familiar result for
: the distance of fall,
$$
t=0
$$
1 2
x(t) = 2(0) — Sgt
$$
y=0
$$
2
$$
{\bf y}=0
$$
and the time of fall from a height A = z(0) is given by
t = V2h/g
$$
\dot{z}
$$
Hence the result for the eastward deflection d of a particle dropped from rest at
a height A and at a northern latitude A ist
$$
\mathsf{z} ( t ) \cong\mathsf{z} ( 0 ) \,-\frac{1} {2} \mathsf{g} t^{2}
$$
1 8h?
d = >wcosa,/— (10.35)
$$
h=z ( 0 )
$$
3 g
An object dropped from a height of 100 m at latitude 45° is deflected approxi-
$$
t \cong\sqrt{2 h / g}
$$
mately 1.55 cm (neglecting the effects of air resistance).
$$
\boldsymbol{d}
$$
*According to M. S. Tiersten and H. Soodak, Am. J: Phys. 68, 129 (2000), the southerly deflection is on
the order of a million times smaller than the easterly deflection for a drop of about 100 m, and there is
$$
\boldsymbol{\lambda}
$$
no credible evidence that the southerly deflection has been correctly measured, despite many attempts.
+The eastward deflection was predicted by Newton (1679), and several experiments (notably those
$$
h
$$
of Robert Hooke) appeared to confirm the results. The most careful measurements were probably
those of F. Reich (1831; published 1833), who dropped pellets down a mine shaft 188 m deep and
$$
d \; \cong\; \frac{1} {3} \, \omega\, \operatorname{c o s} \, \lambda\sqrt{\frac{8 h^{3}} {g}} \tag{10.35}
$$
observed a mean deflection of 28 mm. This is smaller than the value calculated from Equation 10.35,
the decrease being due to air resistance effects. In all the experiments, a small southerly component
$$
4 5^{\circ}
$$
of the deflection was observed—and remained unaccounted for until Coriolis’s theorem was appre-
$$
J
$$
ciated (see Problems 10-13 and 10-14).

<!-- page 16 -->

402 10 / MOTION IN A NONINERTIAL REFERENCE FRAME
$$
h
$$
To demonstrate the power of the Coriolis method for obtaining the equations
of motion in a noninertial reference frame, rework the last example but use
$$
\boldsymbol{R}
$$
only the formalism previously developed—the theory of central-force motion.
Solution. If we release a particle of small mass from a tower of height h above
$$
\varepsilon\cong1
$$
Earth’s surface, the path the particle describes is a conic section—an ellipse
with e = | and with one focus very close to Earth’s center. If Ris Earth’s radius
$$
\boldsymbol{\lambda}
$$
and A the (northern) latitude, then at the moment of release, the particle has a
horizontal velocity in the eastward direction:
$$
v_{\mathrm{h o r}}=\, r \omega\, \cos\, \lambda\,=\, ( R \,+\, h ) \omega\, \cos\, \lambda
$$
Vhor = Tw cosA = (R+ h)wcosaA
and the angular momentum about the polar axis is
$$
l=\, m r v_{\mathrm{h o r}}=\, m ( R \,+\, h )^{2} \omega\, \cos\, \lambda \tag{10.36}
$$
L= mrvyo, = m(R+ h)?w cos A (10.36)
The equation of the path is*
$$
\frac{\alpha} {r}=1 \,-\, \varepsilon\, \operatorname{c o s} \theta \tag{10.37}
$$
- =1-ecos0 (10.37)
if we measure 6 from the initial position of the particle (see Figure 10-10). At t= 0,
$$
t=0
$$
we have
a
$$
\boldsymbol{\theta}
$$
———_ =] —-
R+h °
$$
\frac{\alpha} {R \,+\, h}=\, 1 \,-\, \varepsilon
$$
so Equation 10.37 can be written as
l-—e)(Rt+h
$$
r=\cfrac{( 1 ~-~ \varepsilon) \, ( R ~+~ h )} {1 ~-~ \varepsilon\, \operatorname{c o s} \, \theta} \tag{10.38}
$$
r= C= e)(R+ (10.38)
1 — ecos 6
$$
\begin{aligned} {\frac{1} {2} \, r^{2} \, \frac{d \theta} {d t}=\frac{1} {2 \, m}} \\ \end{aligned}
$$
From Equation 8.12 for the areal velocity, we can write
1 ,d0 1
$$
\theta
$$
po.
2 dt 2m
$$
t
$$
Thus, the time ¢ required to describe an angle @ is
8
$$
t=\frac{m} {l} \! \int_{0}^{\theta} \! r^{2} d \theta
$$
t=" | 2d0
L Jo
$$
l
$$
Substituting into this expression the value of /from Equation 10.36 and r from
Equation 10.38, we find
$$
r
$$
1 8f 1[-e \3
t=——— | |-——___ ] dé 10.39
$$
\begin{aligned} {t=\frac{1} {\omega\, \operatorname{c o s} \, \lambda} \, \int_{0}^{\theta} \! \! \left( \! \! \frac{1 \,-\, \epsilon} {1 \,-\, \epsilon\, \operatorname{c o s} \, \theta} \right)^{2} \! d \theta} \\ \end{aligned} \tag{10.39}
$$
15 (455) (
*Notice that there is a change of sign between Equation 10.37 and Equation 8.41 due to the differ-
$$
\boldsymbol{\theta}
$$
ent origins for @ in the two cases.

<!-- page 17 -->

/\
oS ee ue
$$
\boldsymbol{\theta}=\boldsymbol{\theta}_{0}
$$
FIGURE 10-10 The rather complicated geometry for describing the motion of a
falling particle in a noninertial system using central-force motion.
If we let 6 = 0) when the particle has reached Earth’s surface (r = R), then
$$
r=R )
$$
Equation 10.38 becomes
R _ 1-e
Rt+th 1-—ecos@
$$
\cfrac{R} {R ~+~ h}=\cfrac{1 ~-~ \varepsilon} {1 ~-~ \varepsilon\, \operatorname{c o s} \, \theta_{0}}
$$
or, inverting,
h 1-ecos@
1+—==——
$$
\begin{aligned} {1 \,+\, \frac{h} {R}} & {{}=\frac{1 \,-\, \epsilon\, \operatorname{c o s} \theta_{0}} {1 \,-\, \epsilon}} \\ {} & {{}=\frac{1 \,-\, \epsilon[ \, 1 \,-\, 2 \, \operatorname{s i n}^{2} ( \theta_{0} / 2 ) \, ]} {1 \,-\, \epsilon}} \\ {} & {{}=1 \,+\, \frac{2 \epsilon} {1 \,-\, \epsilon} \, \operatorname{s i n}^{2} \frac{\theta_{0}} {2}} \\ \end{aligned} \tag{10.40}
$$
R l-e
_ 1-—efl — 2sin?(@)/2)]
l-e
2e | ,%
$$
{\frac{h} {R}}={\frac{2 \varepsilon} {1 \,-\, \varepsilon}} \, \operatorname{s i n}^{2} {\frac{\theta_{0}} {2}}
$$
= 1+2—— sin? — (10.40)
l-e 2
from which we have
$$
\boldsymbol{\theta}
$$
h Qe +9 0
= = —— sin* —
R Ii-e 2
$$
( \theta_{0} / 2 )
$$
Because the path described by the particle is almost vertical, little change oc-
curs in the angle 6 between the position of release and the point at which the
particle reaches the surface of Earth; 6 is therefore small and sin(6,/2) can be
$$
\boldsymbol{\theta}_{0}
$$
approximated by its argument:
h £63
= = 10.41)
$$
\frac{h} {R} \cong\frac{\varepsilon\theta_{0}^{2}} {2 ( 1 ~-~ \varepsilon)} \tag{10.41}
$$
R 2(1-.e) (

<!-- page 18 -->

404 10 / MOTION IN A NONINERTIAL REFERENCE FRAME
If we expand the integrand in Equation 10.39 by the same method used to
$$
t=\frac{1} {\omega~ \cos~ \lambda} \int_{0}^{\theta} \frac{d \theta} {\bigl\{1 ~+~ [ \, 2 \varepsilon/ ( 1 ~-~ \varepsilon) \, ] \sin{}^{2} ( \theta/ 2 ) \bigr\}^{2}}
$$
obtain Equation 10.40, we find
1 f do
$$
\theta
$$
t = OO Ta) bralya Nd. 87n Jan 2
w cos A Jo {1 + [2e/(1 — e)]sin2(6/2)}
and because @ is small, we have
$$
t \: \cong\: \frac{1} {\omega\, \cos\, \lambda} \! \int_{0}^{\theta} \frac{d \theta} {[ 1 \:+\: \varepsilon\theta^{2} / 2 ( 1 \:-\: \varepsilon) ]^{\, 2}}
$$
p~ | a.
~ @cosAJo [1 + 267/2(1 — e)]?
$$
t ( \boldsymbol{\theta} \,=\, \boldsymbol{\theta}_{0} ) \;=\; T
$$
Substituting for ¢€/2(1 — e) from Equation 10.41 and writing ¢(@ = 69) = T for
the total time of fall, we obtain
$$
\varepsilon/ 2 ( 1-\varepsilon)
$$
r= | a
~ wcosa Jo [1 + (h02/RO3) |?
1 {* 2h
$$
\begin{aligned} {T \,} & {{} \cong\, \frac{1} {\omega\, \operatorname{c o s} \lambda} \int_{0}^{\theta_{0}} \frac{d \theta} {\big[ 1 \,+\, \big( \hbar\theta^{2} / R \theta_{0}^{2} \big) \, \big]^{2}}} \\ {} & {{} \cong\, \frac{1} {\omega\, \operatorname{c o s} \lambda} \! \int_{0}^{\theta_{0}} \! \! \left( 1 \,-\, \frac{2 h} {R \theta_{0}^{2}} \, \theta^{2} \right) d \theta} \\ {} & {{}=\frac{1} {\omega\, \operatorname{c o s} \lambda} \left( 1 \,-\, \frac{2 h} {3 R} \right) \! \theta_{0}} \\ \end{aligned}
$$
= — 1 — —,, 6? | dé
@ cosa \ ( RO )
$$
\boldsymbol{\theta}_{\omicron}
$$
1 2h
=—— {1 -— ]@
$$
\theta_{\, 0} \; \cong\; \frac{\omega T \cos\, \lambda} {1 \,-\, 2 h / 3 R} \; \cong\; \omega T \cos\, \lambda\Biggl( 1 \,+\, \frac{2 h} {3 R} \Biggr)
$$
w cos A ( 24) °
Solving for 69, we find
wT cos A 2h
$$
\omega T ,
$$
0) = ———y = @Tcosdll +>
0 T-2n3R OO ( 21)
$$
\mathit{T} ,
$$
During the time of fall T, Earth turns through an angle wT, so the point on
Earth directly beneath the initial position of the particle moves toward the east
$$
R \omega T
$$
by an amount RwT cos A. During the same time, the particle is deflected toward
the east by an amount R6>. Thus, the net easterly deviation d is
d= R60, — RwT cosa
$$
\boldsymbol{d}
$$
= 2 hwT cos A
3
$$
R \theta_{0}
$$
and using T = V 2h/g as in the preceding example, we have, finally,
1 3
$$
\begin{aligned} {d} & {{}=R \theta_{0} \,-\, R \omega\, T \, \operatorname{c o s} \, \lambda} \\ {} & {{}=\frac{2} {3} \, h \omega\, T \, \operatorname{c o s} \, \lambda} \\ \end{aligned}
$$
d = =wcosa, joe
3 g
which is identical with the result obtained previously (Equation 10.35).
$$
T \cong\sqrt{2 h / g}
$$
The effect of the Coriolis force on the motion of a pendulum produces a preces-
sion, or rotation with time of the plane of oscillation. Describe the motion of
$$
d \, \cong\, \frac{1} {3} \, \omega\, \operatorname{c o s} \, \lambda\, \sqrt{\frac{8 h^{3}} {g}}
$$
this system, called a Foucault pendulum.*
*Devised in 1851 by the French physicist Jean-Bernard-Léon Foucault, pronounced Foo-co
$$
\mathbf{a}
$$
(1819-1868).

<!-- page 19 -->

; Solution. To describe this effect, let us select a set of coordinate axes with ori-
$$
x-y
$$
: gin at the equilibrium point of the pendulum and zaxis along the local vertical.
: We are interested only in the rotation of the plane of oscillation—that is, we
wish to consider the motion of the pendulum bob in the x-y plane (the hori-
$$
\mathbf{\dot{z}}
$$
q zontal plane). We therefore limit the motion to oscillations of small amplitude,
with the horizontal excursions small compared with the length of the pendu-
$$
\dot{x}
$$
: lum. Under this condition, 2 is small compared with x and j and can be neg-
' lected.
: The equation of motion is
$$
\dot{y}
$$
T
: a,=gt nm 20 Xv, (10.42)
$$
{\bf a}_{r}={\bf g} \ +{\frac{\bf T} {m}}-2 {\bf\omega} \times{\bf v} , \tag{10.42}
$$
: where T/m is the acceleration produced by the force of tension T in the pendu-
lum suspension (Figure 10-11). We therefore have, approximately,
x
$$
\mathbf{T} / \boldsymbol{m}
$$
: T,= —Te
l
$$
\mathbf{T}
$$
:
| T, = ~T (10.43)
; T,=T
$$
\left. \begin{aligned} {T_{x}} & {{}=-T \cdot\frac{x} {l}} \\ {T_{y}} & {{}=-T \cdot\frac{y} {l}} \\ {T_{z}} & {{} \equiv T} \\ \end{aligned} \right\} \tag{10.43}
$$
: As before,
, &)= 0
$$
\begin{aligned} {g_{x}} & {{}=\, 0} \\ {g_{y}} & {{}=\, 0} \\ {g_{z}} & {{}=\,-g} \\ \end{aligned}
$$
? &-— —&
and
: #, = —wcosr
$$
{{\begin{aligned} {\boldsymbol{\omega}_{\, x}} & {{}={-\mathbf{\omega} \, \operatorname{c o s} \lambda}} \\ {\boldsymbol{\omega}_{\, y}} & {{}={0}} \\ {\boldsymbol{\omega}_{\, z}} & {{}={\mathbf{\omega} \, \operatorname{s i n} \lambda}} \\ \end{aligned}}}
$$
w, = 0
| o,=osindr
$$
\begin{aligned} {} & {{} \qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\quad\eqref{S u s p e n s i o n p o i n t}} \\ {} & {{} \qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\quad\mathrm{~ a t ~ g r e a t ~ h e i g h t}} \\ {} & {{} l} \\ \hline{} & {{} \qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad} \\ {} & {{} \qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\quad\vdots} \\ {} & {{} \qquad\qquad\qquad\qquad\quad\vdots} \\ {} & {{} \qquad\qquad\qquad T_{y}=-T \cdot\frac{\d T} {T_{z}} \prod_{m \in\mathbb{R}}^{'} {T_{s}=-T \cdot\frac{x} {l}}} \\ \end{aligned} y
$$
Zz
| Suspension point
\ at great height
$$
\mathbf{s}
$$
l
| 7 J
$$
- z
$$
Th peor
| (ee T,= T I
x a aa
$$
\mathbf{T}
$$
7 FIGURE 10-11 Geometry for the Foucault pendulum. The acceleration g vector is
: along the —z-direction, and the tension T is separated into x-, y-,
$$
x-, y \cdot
$$
| and z-components.

<!-- page 20 -->

406 10 / MOTION IN A NONINERTIAL REFERENCE FRAME
$$
\begin{aligned} {\left( {{\mathbf{v}}_{r}} \right)_{x}} & {{}=\, \dot{x}} \\ {\left( {{\mathbf{v}}_{r}} \right)_{y}} & {{}=\, \dot{y}} \\ {\left( {{\mathbf{v}}_{r}} \right)_{z}} & {{}=\, \dot{z} \; \cong\; 0} \\ \end{aligned}
$$
with
(vie = %
$$
{\bf\omega} {\bf\times v} ~ \cong~ \left| \begin{matrix} {{\bf e}_{x}} & {{\bf e}_{y}} & {{\bf e}_{z}} \\ {-{\bf\omega} \cos\lambda} & {0} & {{\bf\omega} \sin\lambda} \\ {{\dot{x}}} & {{\dot{y}}} & {0} \end{matrix} \right|
$$
(vy = 5
(v),= = 0
$$
\left. \begin{aligned} {} & {{} ( \omega~ {\bf x} ~ {\bf v}_{r} )_{x} ~ \cong~-{\dot{y}} ~ \omega~ {\operatorname{s i n}} ~ \lambda} \\ {} & {{} ( \omega~ {\bf x} ~ {\bf v}_{r} )_{y} ~ \cong~ {\dot{x}} ~ \omega~ {\operatorname{s i n}} ~ \lambda} \\ {} & {{} ( \omega~ {\bf x} ~ {\bf v}_{r} )_{z} ~ \cong~ {\bf-{\dot{y}}} ~ \omega~ {\operatorname{c o s}} ~ \lambda} \\ \end{aligned} \right\} \tag{10.44}
$$
Therefore,
e, e, e,
$$
\left. \begin{array} {c} {{\left( \mathbf{a}_{r} \right)_{x} \,=\, \ddot{x} \, \cong\,-\, \frac{T} {m} \! \cdot\! \frac{x} {l}+\, 2 \dot{y} \omega\, \mathrm{s i n} \, \, \lambda}} \\ {{\left( \mathbf{a}_{r} \right)_{y} \, \cong\, \ddot{y} \, \cong\,-\, \frac{T} {m} \! \cdot\! \frac{y} {l}-\, 2 \dot{x} \omega\, \mathrm{s i n} \, \, \lambda}} \\ \end{array} \right\} \tag{10.45}
$$
@oXv = |-wcosA 0 wsind
& 5 0
$$
\alpha^{2} \equiv T \! / m l \cong g / l ,
$$
so that
' (w Xv,), = —jposinaA
$$
T \cong m g
$$
(mw Xv,), = xkwsinA (10.44)
(w X v,), = —ja@cosa
$$
\boldsymbol{\omega}_{z}=
$$
Thus, the equations of interest are
T
$$
\boldsymbol{\lambda}
$$
(a), =k = - ait 2hw sin A
$$
\boldsymbol{\omega}
$$
(10.45)
(a), =J= aoe Qxw sin A
$$
\left. \begin{matrix} {\ddot{x} \,+\, \alpha^{2} x \, \, \cong\, \, \, \, 2 \omega_{z} \dot{y}} \\ {\ddot{y} \,+\, \alpha^{2} y \, \, \cong\,-2 \omega_{z} \dot{x}} \\ \end{matrix} \right\} \tag{10.46}
$$
wee 2 ong
For small displacements, T = mg. Defining a? = T/ml = g/l, and writing w, =
$$
\dot{y}
$$
w sin A, we have
X+a’x = 2w,5 10.46
$$
\ddot{x}
$$
¥ + a’y = —2w,x (10.46)
We note that the equation for % contains a term in j and that the equation
$$
\dot{x}
$$
for ¥ contains a term in x. Such equations are called coupled equations. A solu-
tion for this pair of coupled equations can be effected by adding the first of the
$$
\ddot{y}
$$
above equations to 7 times the second:
(% + 75) + a(x t iy) = —-2w,(ix— j) = —2io(k+ w)
$$
i
$$
If we write
q=xt ty
$$
( \, \ddot{x} \;+\; i \, \ddot{y} ) \;+\; \alpha^{2} ( x \,+\; i y ) \; \, \cong\; \,-2 \omega_{z} ( i \dot{x}-\; \dot{y} ) \;=\,-2 i \omega_{z} ( \dot{x}+\; i \ddot{y} )
$$
we then have
G+ 2iwgt+a’q = 0
$$
q \cong x+\, i y
$$
This equation is identical with the equation that describes damped oscillations
$$
\ddot{q} \,+\, 2 i \, \omega_{z} \dot{q} \,+\, \alpha^{2} q \; \cong\; 0
$$
(Equation 3.35), except that here the term corresponding to the damping factor

<!-- page 21 -->

$$
q ( t ) \ \cong\ \exp[-i \omega_{z} t ] \big[ \, A \exp\big( \sqrt{-\omega_{z}^{2} \,-\, \alpha^{2}} \; t \big) \,+\, B \exp\big( \ -\sqrt{-\omega_{z}^{2} \,-\, \alpha^{2}} \; t \big) \big] \tag{10.47}
$$
is purely imaginary. The solution (see Equation 3.37) is
q(t) = exp[—iw,t][.A exp(V —@? — a? t) + Bexp( —-V—@? — a? t)] (10.47)
$$
\boldsymbol{\omega}_{\boldsymbol{z}}=0
$$
If Earth were not rotating, so that w, = 0, then the equation for q would
become
$$
\boldsymbol{q}
$$
gj’ +a’q = 0, w,=0
from which it is seen that a corresponds to the oscillation frequency of the pen-
$$
\ddot{q}^{\prime} \,+\, \alpha^{2} q^{\prime} \, \, \cong\, \, 0 , \qquad\omega_{z}=\, 0
$$
dulum. This frequency is clearly much greater than the angular frequency of
Earth’s rotation. Therefore, a > w,, and the equation for q(t) becomes
$$
\boldsymbol{\alpha}
$$
g(t) = e7@4(Ae@ + Be) (10.48)
We can interpret this equation more easily if we note that the equation for
$$
\alpha\gg\omega_{z}
$$
q has the solution
q(t) = x'(t) + iy'(t) = Ae®! + Be #!
$$
q ( t )
$$
Thus,
q(t) = q'(t) em
$$
q ( t ) \; \; \cong\; \; e^{\,-\, i \omega, t} ( A e^{i \alpha t} \,+\, B e^{\,-\, i \alpha t} ) \tag{10.48}
$$
or
x(t) + y(t) = [(x'(t) + ty'()] +e 4
$$
q^{\prime}
$$
= (x' + iy’) (cos w,t — i sin w,t)
= (x’cos wt + y'sin w,t) + i(—x'sin w,t + y'cos @,t)
$$
q^{\prime} ( t ) \;=\; x^{\prime} ( t ) \;+\; i y^{\prime} \left( t \right) \;=\; A e^{i \alpha t} \,+\; B e^{-i \alpha t}
$$
Equating real and imaginary parts,
x(t) = x’ cos w,t + y' sin w,t
$$
q ( t ) \;=\; q^{\prime} \, ( t ) \, \cdot\, e^{\,-\, i w_{z} t}
$$
y(t) = —x' sin w,t + y' cos w,t
We can write these equations in matrix form as
$$
\begin{array} {l} {{x ( t ) \;+\; i y ( t ) \;=\; \left[ \, \left( x^{\prime} ( t ) \;+\; i y^{\prime} ( t ) \, \right] \cdot\, e^{-\, i \omega_{z} t} \right.}} \\ {{\;=\; \left( x^{\prime} \;+\; i y^{\prime} \right) \left( \cos\, \omega_{z} t \;-\; i \sin\, \omega_{z} t \right)}} \\ {{\;=\; \left( x^{\prime} \cos\, \omega_{z} t \;+\; y^{\prime} \sin\, \omega_{z} t \right) \;+\; i (-x^{\prime} \sin\, \omega_{z} t \;+\; y^{\prime} \cos\, \omega_{z} t )}} \end{array}
$$
x(t cos wt sinw,t\/ x'(t
()) _( cose, t\(*@ 10.49)
$$
\left. \begin{aligned} {x ( t )} & {{} \;=\; x^{\prime} \, \cos\, \omega_{z} t \,+\, y^{\prime} \, \sin\, \omega_{z} t} \\ {y ( t )} & {{} \;=\,-\, x^{\prime} \, \sin\, \omega_{z} t \,+\, y^{\prime} \, \cos\, \omega_{z} t} \end{aligned} \right\}
$$
y(t) ~sinw,t cos w,t/ \ y(t)
from which (x, y) may be obtained from (x’, y’) by the application of a rotation
$$
\biggl( \begin{matrix} {x ( t )} \\ {y ( t )} \\ \end{matrix} \biggr)=\biggl( \begin{matrix} {\phantom{-} \operatorname{c o s} \, \omega_{z} t} & {\operatorname{s i n} \, \omega_{z} t} \\ {-\operatorname{s i n} \, \omega_{z} t} & {\operatorname{c o s} \, \omega_{z} t} \\ \end{matrix} \biggr) \biggl( \begin{matrix} {x^{\prime} ( t )} \\ {y^{\prime} ( t )} \\ \end{matrix} \biggr) \tag{10.49}
$$
matrix of the familiar form
cos@ sin@
$$
( x , \, y )
$$
A= . (10.50)
—-sin@ cosé
$$
( \boldsymbol{x}^{\prime} , \boldsymbol{y}^{\prime} )
$$
Thus, the angle of rotation is @ = w,t, and the plane of oscillation of the pendu-
lum therefore rotates with a frequency w, = sin A. The observation of this ro-
$$
\boldsymbol{\lambda}=\left( \begin{matrix} {\phantom{-} \operatorname{c o s} \theta\} & {\operatorname{s i n} \theta} \\ {-\operatorname{s i n} \theta\} & {\operatorname{c o s} \theta} \\ \end{matrix} \right) \tag{10.50}
$$
tation gives a clear demonstration of the rotation of Earth.*
*Vincenzo Viviani (1622-1703), a pupil of Galileo, had noticed as early as about 1650 that a pendu-
$$
\boldsymbol{\theta}=\boldsymbol{\omega}_{\boldsymbol{z}} \boldsymbol{t} ,
$$
lum undergoes a slow rotation, but there is no evidence that he correctly interpreted the phenome-
non. Foucault’s invention of the gyroscope in the year following the demonstration of his pendulum
$$
{\boldsymbol{\omega}}_{\boldsymbol{z}}=\boldsymbol{\omega}
$$
| provided even more striking visual proof of Earth’s rotation.

<!-- page 22 -->

408 10 / MOTION IN A NONINERTIAL REFERENCE FRAME
PROBLEMS
$$
a
$$
10-1. Calculate the centrifugal acceleration, due to Earth’s rotation, on a particle on the
surface of Earth at the equator. Compare this result with the gravitational accelera-
$$
r_{0}
$$
tion. Compute also the centrifugal acceleration due to the motion of Earth about
the Sun and justify the remark made in the text that this acceleration may be neg-
lected compared with the acceleration caused by axial rotation.
$$
\boldsymbol{\nu}
$$
10-2. An automobile drag racer drives a car with acceleration a and instantaneous veloc-
ity v. The tires (of radius m) are not slipping. Find which point on the tire has the
$$
\mu_{s}
$$
greatest acceleration relative to the ground. What is this acceleration?
10-3. In Example 10.2, assume that the coefficient of static friction between the hockey
puck and a horizontal rough surface (on the merry-go-round) is 4. How far away
$$
\boldsymbol{g}
$$
from the center of the merry-go-round can the hockey puck be placed without
sliding?
$$
\mathbf{\Delta}_{\boldsymbol{g}}=\mathsf{5 2 \ m m / s^{2}}
$$
10-4. In Example 10.2, for what initial velocity and direction in the rotating system will
the hockey puck appear to be subsequently motionless in the fixed system? What
will be the motion in the rotating system? Let the initial position be the same as in
$$
h
$$
Example 10.2. You may choose to do a numerical calculation.
10-5. Perform a numerical calculation using the parameters in Example 10.2 and Figure
$$
\frac{4} {3}
$$
10-4e, but find the initial velocity for which the path of motion passes back over the
initial position in the rotating system. At what time does the puck exit the merry-go-
$$
\boldsymbol{\lambda}
$$
round?
10-6. A bucket of water is set spinning about its symmetry axis. Determine the shape of
the water in the bucket.
$$
\boldsymbol{\lambda}
$$
10-7. Determine how much greater the gravitational field strength gis at the pole than at
the equator. Assume a spherical Earth. If the actual measured difference is
$$
\sqrt{8 h^{3} / g}
$$
Ag = 52 mm/s’, explain the difference. How might you calculate this difference
between the measured result and your calculation?
10-8. Ifa particle is projected vertically upward to a height h above a point on Earth’s sur-
$$
V_{0}
$$
face at a northern latitude A, show that it strikes the ground at a point 3 @ cos A-
V8h3/g to the west. (Neglect air resistance, and consider only small vertical
$$
\boldsymbol{\lambda}
$$
heights.)
10-9. If a projectile is fired due east from a point on the surface of Earth at a northern
latitude A with a velocity of magnitude Vy and at an angle of inclination to the hor-
$$
\boldsymbol{\alpha}
$$
izontal of a, show that the lateral deflection when the projectile strikes Earth is
4Vo .
$$
d=\cfrac{4 \, V_{0}^{3}} {g^{2}} \cdot\omega\, \operatorname{s i n} {\lambda} \cdot\operatorname{s i n} {^2 \alpha} \, \operatorname{c o s} {\alpha}
$$
d= —,-wsinA- sin?a cosa
&
$$
\boldsymbol{\omega}
$$
where w is the rotation frequency of Earth.

<!-- page 23 -->

PROBLEMS 409
$$
\boldsymbol{\omega}=0
$$
10-10. In the preceding problem, if the range of the projectile is Ry for the case w = 0,
show that the change of range due to the rotation of Earth is
$$
R_{0}^{\prime}
$$
QR? 1
an’ = [7 cova( cota ~ tana)
$$
\Delta R^{\prime}=\sqrt{\frac{2 R_{0}^{\prime\, 3}} {g}} \cdot\omega\, \cos\lambda\Biggl( \cot{}^{1 / 2} \alpha-\frac{1} {3} \, \tan{}^{3 / 2} \! \alpha\Biggr)
$$
j g 3
: 10-11. Obtain an expression for the angular deviation of a particle projected from the
$$
\boldsymbol{\lambda}
$$
q North Pole in a path that lies close to Earth. Is the deviation significant for a mis-
$$
\varepsilon=\frac{R \omega^{2} \, \sin\, \lambda\, \cos\, \lambda} {g_{0} \,-\, R \omega^{2} \, \cos^{2} \lambda}
$$
sile that makes a 4,800-km flight in 10 minutes? What is the “miss distance” if the
missile is aimed directly at the target? Is the miss distance greater for a 19,300-km
$$
\boldsymbol{R}
$$
flight at the same velocity?
10-12. Show that the small angular deviation ¢ of a plumb line from the true vertical (i.e.,
$$
\boldsymbol{g}
$$
toward the center of Earth) at a point on Earth’s surface at a latitude A is
' Rw? sin A cos A
$$
\boldsymbol{g}_{0}
$$
: e=-—eeero
Bo — Rw? cos? A
$$
\boldsymbol{g}
$$
} where R is the radius of Earth. What is the value (in seconds of arc) of the maxi-
$$
T=\sqrt{2 h / g}
$$
mum deviation? Note that the entire denominator in the answer is actually the ef
fective g, and gp denotes the pure gravitational component.
$$
\boldsymbol{\omega}
$$
10-13. Refer to Example 10.3 concerning the deflection from the plumb line of a particle
falling in Earth’s gravitational field. Take g to be defined at ground level and use
$$
( C_{2} )
$$
: the zeroth order result for the time-of-fall, T = V 2h/g. Perform a calculation in
second approximation (i.e., retain terms in w?) and calculate the southerly deflec-
$$
( C_{1} )
$$
| tion. There are three components to consider: (a) Coriolis force to second order
(Cj), (b) variation of centrifugal force with height (C,), and (c) variation of gravi-
$$
( C_{3} )
$$
| tational force with height (C3). Show that each of these components gives a result
$$
C_{i} \frac{h^{2}} {g} \, \omega^{2} \, \operatorname{s i n} \, \lambda\, \operatorname{c o s} \, \lambda
$$
equal to
ie
$$
C_{1}=2 / 3 , \, C_{2}=5 / 6
$$
C;— w? sin A cos A
| &
$$
C_{3}=5 / 2 .
$$
| with C; = 2/3, Cy, = 5/6, and C, = 5/2. The total southerly deflection is therefore
| (4h?w? sin A cos A)/g.
$$
( 4 h^{2} \omega^{2}
$$
| 10-14. Refer to Example 10.3 and the previous problem, but drop the particle at Earth’s sur-
| face down a mineshaft to a depth h. Show that in this case there is no southerly de-
$$
h
$$
| flection due to the variation of gravity and that the total southerly deflection is only
$$
{\frac{3} {2}} {\frac{h^{2} \omega^{2}} {g}} \, \operatorname{s i n} \, \lambda\, \operatorname{c o s} \, \lambda
$$
| 3 h2w?
9 a sin A cos A
$$
U ( r )
$$
: 10-15. Consider a particle moving in a potential U(r). Rewrite the Lagrangian in terms of
| a coordinate system in uniform rotation with respect to an inertial frame.
$$
\boldsymbol{H}
$$
| Calculate the Hamiltonian and determine whether H = E. Is Ha constant of the
motion? If E is not a constant of motion, why isn’t it? The expression for the
$$
H=E .
$$
Hamiltonian thus obtained is the standard formula 1/2 mv* + U plus an addi-
tional term. Show that the extra term is the centrifugal potential energy. Use the
$$
\boldsymbol{E}
$$
Lagrangian you obtained to reproduce the equations of motion given in Equation
$$
m v^{2}+U
$$
10.25 (without the second and third terms).

<!-- page 24 -->

410 10 / MOTION IN A NONINERTIAL REFERENCE FRAME
10-16. Consider Problem 9-63 but include the effects of the Coriolis force on the probe.
The probe is launched at a latitude of 45° straight up. Determine the horizontal
$$
4 5^{\circ}
$$
deflection in the probe at its maximum height for each part of Problem 9-63.
10-17. Approximate Lake Superior by a circle of radius 162 km at a latitude of 47°.
Assume the water is at rest with respect to Earth and find the depth that the center
is depressed with respect to the shore due to the centrifugal force.
$$
4 7^{\circ}
$$
10-18. A British warship fires a projectile due south near the Falkland Islands during
World War I at latitude 50°S. If the shells are fired at 37° elevation with a speed of
800 m/s, by how much do the shells miss their target and in what direction?
Ignore air resistance.
$$
\mathbf{g}
$$
10-19. Find the Coriolis force on an automobile of mass 1300 kg driving north near
Fairbanks, Alaska (latitude 65°N) at a speed of 100 km/h.
10-20. Calculate the effective gravitational field vector g at Earth’s surface at the poles
and the equator. Take account of the difference in the equatorial (6378 km)
$$
g ~=~ 9 . 7 8 0 3 5 6 [ 1 ~+
$$
and polar (6357 km) radius as well as the centrifugal force. How well does the
result agree with the difference calculated with the result g = 9.780356[1 +
0.0052885 sin 2A — 0.0000059 sin2(2A)]m/s? where A is the latitude?
10-21. Water being diverted during a flood in Helsinki, Finland (latitude 60°N) flows along
$$
^2 \pmb{\lambda}-0
$$
a diversion channel of width 47 m in the south direction at a speed of 3.4 m/s. On
which side is the water the highest (from the standpoint of noninertial systems) and
by how much?
10-22. Shot towers were popular in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries for drop-
$$
\boldsymbol{\lambda}
$$
ping melted lead down tall towers to form spheres for bullets. The lead solidified
while falling and often landed in water to cool the lead bullets. Many such shot
towers were built in New York State. Assume a shot tower was constructed at lati-
tude 42°N, and the lead fell a distance of 27 m. In what direction and how far did
$$
4 7
$$
the lead bullets land from the direct vertical?
