Here is the exact content of Section 9.6, extracted verbatim from the provided images and formatted in Markdown.

---

# 9.6 Elastic Collisions of Two Particles

For the next few sections, we apply the conservation laws to the interaction of two particles. When two particles interact, the motion of one particle relative to the other is governed by the force law that describes the interaction. This interaction may result from actual contact, as in the collision of two billiard balls, or the interaction may take place through the intermediary of a force field. For example, a *free* object (i.e., one not bound in a solar orbit) may "scatter" from the sun by a gravitational interaction, or an \(\alpha\)-particle may be scattered by the electric field of an atomic nucleus. We demonstrated in the previous chapter that once the force law is known, the two-body problem can be completely solved. But even if the force of interaction between two particles is not known, a great deal can still be learned about the relative motion by using only the results of the conservation of momentum and energy. Thus, if the initial state of the system is known (i.e., if the velocity vector of each of the particles is specified), the conservation laws allow us to obtain information regarding the velocity vectors in the final state.*

On the basis of the conservation theorems alone, it is not possible to predict, for example, the angle between the initial and final velocity vectors of one of the particles; knowledge of the force law is required for such details. In this section and the next, we derive those relationships that require only the conservation of momentum and energy. Then, we examine the features of the collision process, which demand that the force law be specified. We limit our discussion primarily to elastic collisions, because the essential features of two-particle kinematics are adequately demonstrated by elastic collisions. The results obtained under the assumption only of momentum and energy conservation are valid (in the nonrelativistic velocity region) even for quantum mechanical systems, because these conservation theorems are applicable to quantum as well as to classical systems.

We demonstrated on several occasions that the description of many physical processes is considerably simplified if one chooses coordinate systems at rest with respect to the system's center of mass. In the problem we now discuss—the elastic collision of two particles—the usual situation (and the one to which we confine our attention) is one in which the collision is between a moving particle and a particle at rest.† Although it is indeed simpler to describe the effects of the collision in a coordinate system in which the *center of mass is at rest*, the actual measurements are made in the **laboratory coordinate system** in which the observer is at rest. In this system, one of the particles is normally moving, and the struck particle is normally at rest. We here refer to these two coordinate systems simply as the **CM** and the **LAB** systems.

We wish to take advantage of the simplifications that result by describing an elastic collision in the CM system. It is therefore necessary to derive the equations connecting the CM and LAB systems.

We use the following notation:
\[
m_1 = \text{Mass of the } \begin{cases} \text{moving} \\ \text{struck} \end{cases} \text{ particle}
\]
\[
m_2 = \text{Mass of the } \begin{cases} \text{moving} \\ \text{struck} \end{cases} \text{ particle}
\]

In general, primed quantities refer to the CM system:
\[
\mathbf{u}_1 = \text{Initial} \quad \big\} \text{velocity of } m_1 \text{ in the LAB system}
\]
\[
\mathbf{v}_1 = \text{Final} \quad \big\} \text{velocity of } m_1 \text{ in the LAB system}
\]
\[
\mathbf{u}'_1 = \text{Initial} \quad \big\} \text{velocity of } m_1 \text{ in the CM system}
\]
\[
\mathbf{v}'_1 = \text{Final} \quad \big\} \text{velocity of } m_1 \text{ in the CM system}
\]
and similarly for \(\mathbf{u}_2, \mathbf{v}_2, \mathbf{u}'_2\), and \(\mathbf{v}'_2\) (but \(\mathbf{u}_2 = 0\)):
\[
T_0 = \text{Total initial kinetic energy in } \begin{cases} \text{LAB} \\ \text{CM} \end{cases} \text{ system}
\]
\[
T'_0 = \text{Total initial kinetic energy in } \begin{cases} \text{LAB} \\ \text{CM} \end{cases} \text{ system}
\]
\[
T_1 = \text{Final kinetic energy of } m_1 \text{ in } \begin{cases} \text{LAB} \\ \text{CM} \end{cases} \text{ system}
\]
\[
T'_1 = \text{Final kinetic energy of } m_1 \text{ in } \begin{cases} \text{LAB} \\ \text{CM} \end{cases} \text{ system}
\]
and similarly for \(T_2\) and \(T'_2\),
\[
\mathbf{V} = \text{velocity of the center of mass in the LAB system}
\]
\[
\psi = \text{angle through which } m_1 \text{ is deflected in the LAB system}
\]
\[
\zeta = \text{angle through which } m_2 \text{ is deflected in the LAB system}
\]
\[
\theta = \text{angle through which } m_1 \text{ and } m_2 \text{ are deflected in the CM system}
\]

Figure 9-10 illustrates the geometry of an elastic collision* in both the LAB and CM systems. The final state in the LAB and CM systems for the scattered particle \(m_1\) may be conveniently summarized by the diagrams in Figure 9-11. We can interpret these diagrams in the following manner. To the velocity \(\mathbf{V}\) of the CM, we can add the final CM velocity \(\mathbf{v}'_1\) of the scattered particle. Depending on the angle \(\theta\) at which the scattering takes place, the possible vectors \(\mathbf{v}'_1\) lie on the circle of radius \(v'_1\) whose center is at the terminus of the vector \(\mathbf{V}\). The LAB velocity \(\mathbf{v}_1\) and LAB scattering angle \(\psi\) are then obtained by connecting the point of origin of \(\mathbf{V}\) with the terminus of \(\mathbf{v}'_1\).

If \(V < v'_1\), only one possible relationship exists between \(\mathbf{V}, \mathbf{v}_1, \mathbf{v}'_1\) and \(\theta\) (see Figure 9-11a). But if \(V > v'_1\), then for every set \(\mathbf{V}, \mathbf{v}'_1\), there exists two possible scattering angles and laboratory velocities: \(\mathbf{v}_{1,b}, \theta_b\) and \(\mathbf{v}_{1,f}, \theta_f\) (see Figure 9-11b), where the designations \(b\) and \(f\) stand for *backward* and *forward*. This situation results from the fact that if the final CM velocity \(\mathbf{v}'_1\) is insufficient to overcome the velocity \(\mathbf{V}\) of the center of mass, then, even if \(m_1\) is scattered into the backward direction in the CM system (\(\theta > \pi/2\)), the particle will appear at a forward angle in the LAB system (\(\psi < \pi/2\)). Thus, for \(V > v'_1\), the velocity \(\mathbf{v}_1\) in the LAB system is a double-valued function of \(\psi\). In an experiment, we usually measure \(\psi\), not the velocity *vector* \(\mathbf{v}_1\), so that a single value of \(\psi\) can correspond to two different values of \(\theta\). Note, however, that a specification of the vectors \(\mathbf{V}\) and \(\mathbf{v}'_1\) always leads to a unique combination \(\mathbf{v}_1, \theta\); but a specification of \(\mathbf{V}\) and only the *direction* of \(\mathbf{v}_1\) (i.e., \(\psi\)) allows the possibility of two final vectors, \(\mathbf{v}_{1,b}\) and \(\mathbf{v}_{1,f}\), if \(V > v'_1\).

Having given a qualitative description of the scattering process, we now obtain some of the equations relating the various quantities.

According to the definition of the center of mass (Equation 9.3), we have
\[
m_1\mathbf{r}_1 + m_2\mathbf{r}_2 = M\mathbf{R} \tag{9.60}
\]

Differentiating with respect to the time, we find
\[
m_1\mathbf{u}_1 + m_2\mathbf{u}_2 = M\mathbf{V} \tag{9.61}
\]

But \(\mathbf{u}_2 = 0\) and \(M = m_1 + m_2\); the center of mass must therefore be moving (in the LAB system) toward \(m_2\) with a velocity
\[
\mathbf{V} = \frac{m_1\mathbf{u}_1}{m_1 + m_2} \tag{9.62}
\]

By the same reasoning, because \(m_2\) is initially at rest, the initial CM speed of \(m_2\) must just equal \(V\):
\[
u'_2 = V = \frac{m_1u_1}{m_1 + m_2} \tag{9.63}
\]

Note, however, that the motion and the velocities are opposite in direction and that vectorially \(\mathbf{u}'_2 = -\mathbf{V}\).

The great advantage of using the CM coordinate system is because the total linear momentum in such a system is zero, so that before the collision the particles move directly toward each other and after the collision they move in exactly opposite directions. If the collision is elastic, as we have specified, then the masses do not change, and the conservation of linear momentum and kinetic energy is sufficient to provide that the CM speeds before and after collision are equal:
\[
u'_1 = v'_1, \quad u'_2 = v'_2 \tag{9.64}
\]

Term \(u_1\) is the *relative* speed of the two particles in either the CM or the LAB system, \(u_1 = u'_1 + u'_2\). We therefore have, for the final CM speeds,
\[
v'_2 = \frac{m_1u_1}{m_1 + m_2} \tag{9.65a}
\]
\[
v'_1 = u_1 - u'_2 = \frac{m_2u_1}{m_1 + m_2} \tag{9.65b}
\]

We have (see Figure 9-11a)
\[
v'_1 \sin\theta = v_1 \sin\psi \tag{9.66a}
\]
and
\[
v'_1 \cos\theta + V = v_1 \cos\psi \tag{9.66b}
\]

Dividing Equation 9.66a by Equation 9.66b,
\[
\tan\psi = \frac{v'_1 \sin\theta}{v'_1 \cos\theta + V} = \frac{\sin\theta}{\cos\theta + (V/v'_1)} \tag{9.67}
\]

According to Equations 9.62 and 9.65b, \(V/v'_1\) is given by
\[
\frac{V}{v'_1} = \frac{m_1u_1 / (m_1 + m_2)}{m_2u_1 / (m_1 \div m_2)} = \frac{m_1}{m_2} \tag{9.68}
\]

Thus, the ratio \(m_1/m_2\) governs whether Figure 9-11a or Figure 9-11b describes the scattering process:
\[
\text{Figure 9-11a: } V < v'_1, \quad m_1 < m_2
\]
\[
\text{Figure 9-11b: } V > v'_1, \quad m_1 > m_2
\]

If we combine Equations 9.67 and 9.68 and write
\[
\boxed{\tan\psi = \frac{\sin\theta}{\cos\theta + (m_1/m_2)}} \tag{9.69}
\]
we see that if \(m_1 \ll m_2\), the LAB and CM scattering angles are approximately equal; that is, the particle \(m_2\) is but little affected by the collision with \(m_1\) and acts essentially as a fixed scattering center. Thus
\[
\boxed{\psi \cong \theta, \quad m_1 \ll m_2} \tag{9.70}
\]

However, if \(m_1 = m_2\), then
\[
\tan\psi = \frac{\sin\theta}{\cos\theta + 1} = \tan\frac{\theta}{2}
\]
so that
\[
\boxed{\psi = \frac{\theta}{2}, \quad m_1 = m_2} \tag{9.71}
\]
and the LAB scattering angle is one half the CM scattering angle. Because the maximum value of \(\theta\) is \(180^\circ\), Equation 9.71 indicates that for \(m_1 = m_2\), there can be no scattering in the LAB system at angles greater than \(90^\circ\).

Let us now refer to Figure 9-10c and construct a diagram for the recoil particle \(m_2\) similar to Figure 9-11a. The situation is illustrated in Figure 9-12, from which we find
\[
v_2 \sin\zeta = v'_2 \sin\theta \tag{9.72a}
\]
\[
v_2 \cos\zeta = V - v'_2 \cos\theta \tag{9.72b}
\]

Dividing Equation 9.72a by Equation 9.72b, we have
\[
\tan\zeta = \frac{v'_2 \sin\theta}{V - v'_2 \cos\theta} = \frac{\sin\theta}{(V/v'_2) - \cos\theta}
\]

But, according to Equations 9.63 and 9.65a, \(V\) and \(v'_2\) are equal. Therefore,
\[
\tan\zeta = \frac{\sin\theta}{1 - \cos\theta} = \cot\frac{\theta}{2} \tag{9.73}
\]
which we may write as
\[
\tan\zeta = \tan\left(\frac{\pi}{2} - \frac{\theta}{2}\right)
\]
Thus,
\[
2\zeta = \pi - \theta = \phi \tag{9.74}
\]

For particles with equal mass, \(m_1 = m_2\), we have \(\theta = 2\psi\). Combining this result in Equation 9.74, we have
\[
\boxed{\zeta + \psi = \frac{\pi}{2}, \quad m_1 = m_2} \tag{9.75}
\]

Hence, the scattering of particles of equal mass always produces a final state in which the velocity vectors of the particles are at right angles if one of the particles is initially at rest (see Figure 9-13).*

**FIGURE 9-10** Geometry and notations of an elastic collision in the LAB and CM systems. (a) Initial condition with \(\mathbf{u}_2 = 0\) in the LAB system, (b) initial condition in the CM system, (c) final condition in the LAB system, and (d) final condition in the CM system. Note carefully the scattering angles.

**FIGURE 9-11** The final state of mass \(m_1\) for the elastic collision of two particles for the case (a) \(V < v'_1\) for which there is one trajectory and (b) \(V > v'_1\) for which there are two possible trajectories (\(b\) stands for backward and \(f\) for forward).

**FIGURE 9-12** The final state of recoil mass \(m_2\) in the elastic collision of two particles.

**FIGURE 9-13** For the elastic scattering of two particles of equal mass (\(m_1 = m_2\)) with one of them initially at rest in the LAB system, the final velocities (trajectories) of the two masses are at right angles to each other. Two such possibilities are shown.

## Example 9.6
What is the maximum angle that \(\psi\) can attain for the case \(V > v'_1\)? What is \(\psi_{\text{max}}\) for \(m_1 \gg m_2\) and \(m_1 = m_2\)?

**Solution.** For the case of \(\psi_{\text{max}}\), Figure 9-11b becomes as shown in Figure 9-14. The angle between \(\mathbf{v}'_1\) and \(\mathbf{v}_1\) is \(90^\circ\) for \(\psi\) to be a maximum.
\[
\sin\psi_{\text{max}} = \frac{v'_1}{V} \tag{9.76}
\]

According to Equation 9.68, this is just
\[
\sin\psi_{\text{max}} = \frac{m_2}{m_1}
\]
from which
\[
\psi_{\text{max}} = \sin^{-1}\left(\frac{m_2}{m_1}\right) \tag{9.77}
\]

For \(m_1 \gg m_2, \psi_{\text{max}} = 0\) (no scattering), and for \(m_1 = m_2, \psi_{\text{max}} = 90^\circ\). Generally, for \(m_1 > m_2\), no scattering of \(m_1\) backward of \(90^\circ\) can occur.

---

\*The "initial state" of the system is the condition of the particles when they are not yet sufficiently close to interact appreciably; the "final state" is the condition after the interaction has taken place. For a contact interaction, these conditions are obvious. But if the interaction takes place by a force field, then the rate of decrease of the force with distance must be taken into account in specifying the initial and final states.

†A collision is elastic if no change in the internal energy of the particles results; thus, the conservation of energy may be applied without regard to the internal energy. Notice that heat may be generated when two mechanical bodies collide inelastically. Heat is just a manifestation of the agitation of a body's constituent particles and may therefore be considered a part of the internal energy. The laws governing the elastic collision of two bodies were first investigated by John Wallis (1668), Wren (1668), and Huygens (1669).

\*We assume throughout that the scattering is axially symmetric so that no azimuthal angle need be introduced. However, axial symmetry is not always found in scattering problems; this is particularly true in certain quantum mechanical systems.

\*This result is valid only in the nonrelativistic limit; see Equation 14.131 for the relativistic expression governing this case.