# 9.7 Kinematics of Elastic Collisions

Relationships involving the energies of the particles may be obtained as follows. First, we have simply
\[ T_0 = \frac{1}{2}m_1u_1^2 \tag{9.78} \]

and, in the CM system,
\[ T'_0 = \frac{1}{2}\left(m_1u_1'^2 + m_2u_2'^2\right) \]

which, on using Equations 9.65a and 9.65b, becomes
\[ T'_0 = \frac{1}{2}\frac{m_1m_2}{m_1 + m_2}u_1^2 = \frac{m_2}{m_1 + m_2}T_0 \tag{9.79} \]

This result shows that the initial kinetic energy in the CM system \( T'_0 \) is always a fraction \( m_2/(m_1 + m_2) < 1 \) of the initial LAB energy. For the final CM energies, we find
\[ T'_1 = \frac{1}{2}m_1v_1'^2 = \frac{1}{2}m_1\left(\frac{m_2}{m_1 + m_2}\right)^2 u_1^2 = \left(\frac{m_2}{m_1 + m_2}\right)^2 T_0 \tag{9.80} \]

and
\[ T'_2 = \frac{1}{2}m_2v_2'^2 = \frac{1}{2}m_2\left(\frac{m_1}{m_1 + m_2}\right)^2 u_1^2 = \frac{m_1m_2}{(m_1 + m_2)^2}T_0 \tag{9.81} \]

To obtain \( T_1 \) in terms of \( T_0 \), we write
\[ \frac{T_1}{T_0} = \frac{\frac{1}{2}m_1v_1^2}{\frac{1}{2}m_1u_1^2} = \frac{v_1^2}{u_1^2} \tag{9.82} \]

Referring to Figure 9-11a and using the cosine law, we can write
\[ v_1'^2 = v_1^2 + V^2 - 2v_1V\cos\psi \]

or
\[ \frac{T_1}{T_0} = \frac{v_1^2}{u_1^2} = \frac{v_1'^2}{u_1^2} - \frac{V^2}{u_1^2} + 2\frac{v_1V}{u_1^2}\cos\psi \tag{9.83} \]

From the previous definitions, we have
\[ \frac{v_1'}{u_1} = \frac{m_2}{m_1 + m_2} \quad \text{and} \quad \frac{V}{u_1} = \frac{m_1}{m_1 + m_2} \tag{9.84} \]

The squares of these quantities give the desired expressions for the first two terms on the right-hand side of Equation 9.83. To evaluate the third term, we write, using Equation 9.66a,
\[ 2\frac{v_1V}{u_1^2}\cos\psi = 2\left(v_1'\frac{\sin\theta}{\sin\psi}\right)\cdot \frac{V}{u_1^2}\cos\psi \tag{9.85} \]

The quantity of \( v_1'V/u_1^2 \) can be obtained from the product of the equations in Equation 9.84, and using Equation 9.69, we have
\[ \frac{\sin\theta\cos\psi}{\sin\psi} = \frac{\sin\theta}{\tan\psi} = \cos\theta + \frac{m_1}{m_2} \]

so that
\[ 2\frac{v_1V}{u_1^2}\cos\psi = \frac{2m_1m_2}{(m_1 + m_2)^2}\left(\cos\theta + \frac{m_1}{m_2}\right) \tag{9.86} \]

Substituting Equations 9.84 and 9.86 into Equation 9.83, we obtain
\[ \frac{T_1}{T_0} = \left(\frac{m_2}{m_1 + m_2}\right)^2 - \left(\frac{m_1}{m_1 + m_2}\right)^2 + \frac{2m_1m_2}{(m_1 + m_2)^2}\left(\cos\theta + \frac{m_1}{m_2}\right) \]

which simplifies to
\[ \frac{T_1}{T_0} = 1 - \frac{2m_1m_2}{(m_1 + m_2)^2}(1 - \cos\theta) \tag{9.87a} \]

Similarly, we can also obtain the ratio \( T_1/T_0 \) in terms of the LAB scattering angle \( \psi \):
\[ \frac{T_1}{T_0} = \frac{m_1^2}{(m_1 + m_2)^2}\left[\cos\psi \pm \sqrt{\left(\frac{m_2}{m_1}\right)^2 - \sin^2\psi}\right]^2 \tag{9.87b} \]

where the plus (+) sign for the radical is to be taken unless \( m_1 > m_2 \)—in which case the result is double-valued, and Equation 9.77 specifies the maximum value allowed for \( \psi \).

The LAB energy of the recoil particle \( m_2 \) can be calculated from
\[ \frac{T_2}{T_0} = 1 - \frac{T_1}{T_0} = \frac{4m_1m_2}{(m_1 + m_2)^2}\cos^2\zeta, \quad \zeta \le \pi/2 \tag{9.88} \]

If \( m_1 = m_2 \), we have the simple relation
\[ \frac{T_1}{T_0} = \cos^2\psi, \quad m_1 = m_2 \tag{9.89a} \]

with the restriction noted in the discussion following Equation 9.71 that \( \psi \le 90^\circ \). Also,
\[ \frac{T_2}{T_0} = \sin^2\psi, \quad m_1 = m_2 \tag{9.89b} \]

Several further relationships are
\[ \sin\zeta = \sqrt{\frac{m_1T_1}{m_2T_2}}\sin\psi \tag{9.90} \]
\[ \tan\psi = \frac{\sin 2\zeta}{(m_1/m_2) - \cos 2\zeta} \tag{9.91} \]
\[ \tan\psi = \frac{\sin\phi}{(m_1/m_2) - \cos\phi} \tag{9.92} \]

As an example of applying the kinematic relations we have derived, consider the following situation. Suppose that we have a beam of projectiles, all with mass \( m_1 \) and energy \( T_0 \). We direct this beam toward a target consisting of a group of particles whose masses \( m_2 \) may not all be the same. Some of the incident particles interact with the target particles and are scattered. The incident particles all move in the same direction in a beam of small cross-sectional area, and we assume that the target particles are localized in space so that the scattered particles emerge from a small region. If we position a detector at, say, \( 90^\circ \) to the incident beam and with this detector measure the energies of the scattered particles, we can display the results as in the lower portion of Figure 9-15. This graph is a **histogram** that plots the number of particles detected within a range of energy \( \Delta T \) at the energy \( T \). This particle histogram shows that three energy groups were observed in the particles detected at \( \psi = 90^\circ \). The upper portion of the figure shows a curve giving the scattered energy \( T_1 \) in terms of \( T_0 \) as a function of the mass ratio \( m_2/m_1 \) (Equation 9.87b). The curve can be used to determine the mass \( m_2 \) of the particle from which one of the incident particles was scattered to fall into one of the three energy groups. Thus, the energy group with \( T_1 \approx 0.8T_0 \) results from the scattering by target particles with mass \( m_2 = 10m_1 \), and the other two groups result from target masses \( 5m_1 \) and \( 2m_1 \).

The measurement of the energies of scattered particles is therefore a method of **qualitative analysis** of the target material. Indeed, this method is useful in practice when the incident beam consists of particles (protons, say) that have been given high velocities in an accelerator of some sort. If the detector is capable of precise energy measurements, the method yields accurate information regarding the composition of the target. **Quantitative analysis** can also be made from the intensities of the groups if the cross sections are known (see the following section). Applying this technique has been useful in determining the composition of air pollution.

## Example 9.7
In a head-on elastic collision of two particles with masses \( m_1 \) and \( m_2 \), the initial velocities are \( \mathbf{u}_1 \) and \( \mathbf{u}_2 = \alpha\mathbf{u}_1 \) (\( \alpha > 0 \)). If the initial kinetic energies of the two particles are equal in the LAB system, find the conditions on \( u_1/u_2 \) and \( m_1/m_2 \) so that \( m_1 \) will be at rest in the LAB system after the collision. See Figure 9-16.

**Solution.** Because the initial kinetic energies are equal, we have
\[ \frac{1}{2}m_1u_1^2 = \frac{1}{2}m_2u_2^2 = \frac{1}{2}\alpha^2 m_2u_1^2 \]

or
\[ \frac{m_1}{m_2} = \alpha^2 \tag{9.93} \]

If \( m_1 \) is at rest after the collision, the conservation of energy requires
\[ \frac{1}{2}m_1u_1^2 + \frac{1}{2}m_2u_2^2 = \frac{1}{2}m_2v_2^2 \]

or
\[ m_1u_1^2 = \frac{1}{2}m_2v_2^2 \tag{9.94} \]

The conservation of linear momentum states that
\[ m_1\mathbf{u}_1 + m_2\mathbf{u}_2 = (m_1 + \alpha m_2)\mathbf{u}_1 = m_2\mathbf{v}_2 \tag{9.95} \]

Substituting \( \mathbf{v}_2 \) from Equation 9.95 into Equation 9.94 gives
\[ m_1u_1^2 = \frac{1}{2}m_2\left(\frac{m_1 + \alpha m_2}{m_2}\right)^2 u_1^2 \]

or
\[ m_1 = \frac{1}{2}m_2\left(\frac{m_1}{m_2} + \alpha\right)^2 \tag{9.96} \]

Substituting \( m_1/m_2 = \alpha^2 \) from Equation 9.93 gives
\[ 2\alpha^2 = (\alpha^2 + \alpha)^2 \]

with the result
\[ \alpha = \sqrt{2} - 1 = 0.414 \]
\[ \alpha^2 = 0.172 \]

so that
\[ \frac{m_1}{m_2} = \alpha^2 = 0.172 \]

and
\[ \frac{u_2}{u_1} = \alpha = 0.414 \]

Because \( \alpha > 0 \), both particles are traveling in the same direction; the collision is shown in Figure 9-16.

## Example 9.8
Particles of mass \( m_1 \) elastically scatter from particles of mass \( m_2 \) at rest. (a) At what LAB angle should a magnetic spectrometer be set to detect particles that lose one-third of their momentum? (b) Over what range \( m_1/m_2 \) is this possible? (c) Calculate the scattering angle for \( m_1/m_2 = 1 \).

**Solution.** We have
\[ m_1v_1 = \frac{2}{3}m_1u_1 \quad \text{and} \quad v_1 = \frac{2}{3}u_1 \]

Using Equations 9.82 and 9.87a, we have
\[ \frac{T_1}{T_0} = \frac{v_1^2}{u_1^2} = \left(\frac{2}{3}\right)^2 = 1 - \frac{2m_1m_2}{(m_1 + m_2)^2}(1 - \cos\theta) \tag{9.97} \]

This equation can be solved for \( \cos\theta \), yielding
\[ \cos\theta = 1 - \frac{5(m_1 + m_2)^2}{18m_1m_2} = 1 - y \tag{9.98} \]

where
\[ y = \frac{5(m_1 + m_2)^2}{18m_1m_2} \tag{9.99} \]

But we need \( \psi \), which can be obtained from Equation 9.69.
\[ \tan\psi = \frac{\sin\theta}{\cos\theta + m_1/m_2} = \frac{\sqrt{2y - y^2}}{1 - y + m_1/m_2} \tag{9.100} \]

where we have used Equation 9.98 for \( \cos\theta \) and found \( \sin\theta = \sqrt{2y - y^2} \).

Because \( \tan\psi \) must be a real number, only values for \( m_1/m_2 \) where \( 2 - y \ge 0 \) are possible. Therefore,
\[ 2 - \frac{5(m_1 + m_2)^2}{18m_1m_2} \ge 0 \tag{9.101} \]

which can be reduced to
\[ -5\left(\frac{m_1}{m_2}\right)^2 + 26\frac{m_1}{m_2} - 5 \ge 0 \]

or
\[ -5x^2 + 26x - 5 \ge 0 \tag{9.102} \]

where \( x = m_1/m_2 \). The solutions for \( x \) when Equation 9.102 is equal to zero are \( x = 1/5, 5 \). Substitution verifies that
\[ \frac{1}{5} \le \frac{m_1}{m_2} \le 5 \]

satisfies Equation 9.101, but values of \( m_1/m_2 \) outside this range do not.

Substituting \( m_1/m_2 = 1 \) into Equation 9.99 gives
\[ y = \frac{5(m_1 + m_2)^2}{18m_1m_2} = \frac{5\left(\frac{m_1}{m_2} + 1\right)^2}{18m_1/m_2} \]
\[ = \frac{5(1 + 1)^2}{18} = \frac{10}{9} \]

and substituting for \( y \) into Equation 9.100 gives \( \psi = 48^\circ \).

---

**FIGURE 9-15** Results of particles of mass \( m_1 \) and energy \( T_0 \) being scattered from particles of various masses \( m_2 \) at angle \( \psi = 90^\circ \). Bottom: Histogram of number of particles detected within an energy range \( \Delta T \). Top: Curve giving scattered energy \( T_1 \) in terms of \( T_0 \) as a function of the mass ratio \( m_2/m_1 \).

**FIGURE 9-16** Example 9.7. Velocities are indicated for two particles of different masses in a head-on elastic collision before and after the collision.